Silly Asses



                            by Isaac Asimov









                               A Vignette









Naron of the long-lived Rigellian race was the fourth of his line to

keep the Galactic records.



He had the large book which contained the

list of the numerous races throughout the Galaxies that had developed

intelligence, and the much smaller book listing those races that

had reached maturity and had qualified for the Galactic Federation.

In the first book, a number of those listed were crossed out; those

that, for one reason or another, had failed. Misfortune; biochemical

or biophysical shortcomings; social maladjustment, etc., took their

toll. In the smaller book, however, no member listed had yet blanked

out.



And now Naron, large and incredibly ancient, looked up as a

messenger approached.



“Naron,” said the messenger. “Great One!”



“Well,

well, what is it? Less ceremony.”



“Another group of organisms has

attained maturity.”



“Excellent. Excellent. They are coming up quickly now. Scarcely a

year passes without a new one. And who are these?”



The messenger gave the code number of the Galaxy and the coordinates

of the world within it.



“Ah, yes,” said Naron. “I know the world.”



And in flowing script, he noted it in the first book and transferred

its name into the second--using, as was customary, the name by

which the planet was known to the largest fraction of its populace.

He wrote: Earth.



He said, “These new creatures have set a record. No other group has

passed from intelligence to maturity so quickly. No mistake, I hope.”



“None, sir,” said the messenger.



“They have attained to thermonuclear power, have they?”



“Yes, sir.”



“Well, that’s the criterion.” Naron chuckled. “And soon their ships

will probe out and contact the Federation.”



“Actually, Great One,” said the messenger, reluctantly, “the

Observers tell us they have not yet penetrated space.”



Naron was astonished. “Not at all? Not even a space station?”



“Not yet, sir.”



“But if they have thermonuclear power, where then do they conduct

their tests and detonations?”



“On their own planet, sir.”



Naron rose to his full twenty feet of hight and thundered, “On their

_own_ planet?”



“Yes, sir.”



Slowly, Naron drew out his stylus and passed a line through the

latest addition in the smaller book. It was an unprecedented act,

but, then, Naron was very wise and could see the inevitable as

well as anyone in the Galaxy.



“Silly asses,” he muttered.









Transcriber’s Note:





  This etext was produced from Future Science Fiction, February 1958

(#35). Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.

copyright on this publication was renewed.



  Obvious errors have been silently corrected in this version.