Notes from the Underground



by Fyodor Dostoyevsky





Contents



 NOTES FROM THE UNDERGROUND



 PART I Underground

 I

 II

 III

 IV

 V

 VI

 VII

 VIII

 IX

 X

 XI



 PART II À Propos of the Wet Snow

 I

 II

 III

 IV

 V

 VI

 VII

 VIII

 IX

 X









NOTES FROM THE UNDERGROUND[*]

A NOVEL





* The author of the diary and the diary itself are, of course,

imaginary.
Nevertheless it is clear that such persons as the writer of

these notes not only may, but positively must, exist in our society,

when we consider the circumstances in the midst of which our society is

formed.
I have tried to expose to the view of the public more

distinctly than is commonly done, one of the characters of the recent

past.
He is one of the representatives of a generation still living.
In

this fragment, entitled “Underground,” this person introduces himself

and his views, and, as it were, tries to explain the causes owing to

which he has made his appearance and was bound to make his appearance

in our midst.
In the second fragment there are added the actual notes

of this person concerning certain events in his life.—AUTHOR’S NOTE.
PART I

Underground









I





I am a sick man....
I am a spiteful man.
I am an unattractive man.
I

believe my liver is diseased.
However, I know nothing at all about my

disease, and do not know for certain what ails me.
I don’t consult a

doctor for it, and never have, though I have a respect for medicine and

doctors.
Besides, I am extremely superstitious, sufficiently so to

respect medicine, anyway (I am well-educated enough not to be

superstitious, but I am superstitious).
No, I refuse to consult a

doctor from spite.
That you probably will not understand.
Well, I

understand it, though.
Of course, I can’t explain who it is precisely

that I am mortifying in this case by my spite: I am perfectly well

aware that I cannot “pay out” the doctors by not consulting them; I

know better than anyone that by all this I am only injuring myself and

no one else.
But still, if I don’t consult a doctor it is from spite.
My liver is bad, well—let it get worse!
I have been going on like that for a long time—twenty years.
Now I am

forty.
I used to be in the government service, but am no longer.
I was

a spiteful official.
I was rude and took pleasure in being so.
I did

not take bribes, you see, so I was bound to find a recompense in that,

at least.
(A poor jest, but I will not scratch it out.
I wrote it

thinking it would sound very witty; but now that I have seen myself

that I only wanted to show off in a despicable way, I will not scratch

it out on purpose!)
When petitioners used to come for information to the table at which I

sat, I used to grind my teeth at them, and felt intense enjoyment when

I succeeded in making anybody unhappy.
I almost did succeed.
For the

most part they were all timid people—of course, they were petitioners.
But of the uppish ones there was one officer in particular I could not

endure.
He simply would not be humble, and clanked his sword in a

disgusting way.
I carried on a feud with him for eighteen months over

that sword.
At last I got the better of him.
He left off clanking it.
That happened in my youth, though.
But do you know, gentlemen, what was the chief point about my spite?
Why, the whole point, the real sting of it lay in the fact that

continually, even in the moment of the acutest spleen, I was inwardly

conscious with shame that I was not only not a spiteful but not even an

embittered man, that I was simply scaring sparrows at random and

amusing myself by it.
I might foam at the mouth, but bring me a doll to

play with, give me a cup of tea with sugar in it, and maybe I should be

appeased.
I might even be genuinely touched, though probably I should

grind my teeth at myself afterwards and lie awake at night with shame

for months after.
That was my way.
I was lying when I said just now that I was a spiteful official.
I was

lying from spite.
I was simply amusing myself with the petitioners and

with the officer, and in reality I never could become spiteful.
I was

conscious every moment in myself of many, very many elements absolutely

opposite to that.
I felt them positively swarming in me, these opposite

elements.
I knew that they had been swarming in me all my life and

craving some outlet from me, but I would not let them, would not let

them, purposely would not let them come out.
They tormented me till I

was ashamed: they drove me to convulsions and—sickened me, at last, how

they sickened me!
Now, are not you fancying, gentlemen, that I am

expressing remorse for something now, that I am asking your forgiveness

for something?
I am sure you are fancying that ...
However, I assure

you I do not care if you are....
It was not only that I could not become spiteful, I did not know how to

become anything; neither spiteful nor kind, neither a rascal nor an

honest man, neither a hero nor an insect.
Now, I am living out my life

in my corner, taunting myself with the spiteful and useless consolation

that an intelligent man cannot become anything seriously, and it is

only the fool who becomes anything.
Yes, a man in the nineteenth

century must and morally ought to be pre-eminently a characterless

creature; a man of character, an active man is pre-eminently a limited

creature.
That is my conviction of forty years.
I am forty years old

now, and you know forty years is a whole lifetime; you know it is

extreme old age.
To live longer than forty years is bad manners, is

vulgar, immoral.
Who does live beyond forty?
Answer that, sincerely and

honestly I will tell you who do: fools and worthless fellows.
I tell

all old men that to their face, all these venerable old men, all these

silver-haired and reverend seniors!
I tell the whole world that to its

face!
I have a right to say so, for I shall go on living to sixty

myself.
To seventy!
To eighty!
... Stay, let me take breath ...



You imagine no doubt, gentlemen, that I want to amuse you.
You are

mistaken in that, too.
I am by no means such a mirthful person as you

imagine, or as you may imagine; however, irritated by all this babble

(and I feel that you are irritated) you think fit to ask me who I

am—then my answer is, I am a collegiate assessor.
I was in the service

that I might have something to eat (and solely for that reason), and

when last year a distant relation left me six thousand roubles in his

will I immediately retired from the service and settled down in my

corner.
I used to live in this corner before, but now I have settled

down in it.
My room is a wretched, horrid one in the outskirts of the

town.
My servant is an old country-woman, ill-natured from stupidity,

and, moreover, there is always a nasty smell about her.
I am told that

the Petersburg climate is bad for me, and that with my small means it

is very expensive to live in Petersburg.
I know all that better than

all these sage and experienced counsellors and monitors....
But I am

remaining in Petersburg; I am not going away from Petersburg!
I am not

going away because ... ech!
Why, it is absolutely no matter whether I

am going away or not going away.
But what can a decent man speak of with most pleasure?
Answer: Of himself.
Well, so I will talk about myself.
II





I want now to tell you, gentlemen, whether you care to hear it or not,

why I could not even become an insect.
I tell you solemnly, that I have

many times tried to become an insect.
But I was not equal even to that.
I swear, gentlemen, that to be too conscious is an illness—a real

thorough-going illness.
For man’s everyday needs, it would have been

quite enough to have the ordinary human consciousness, that is, half or

a quarter of the amount which falls to the lot of a cultivated man of

our unhappy nineteenth century, especially one who has the fatal

ill-luck to inhabit Petersburg, the most theoretical and intentional

town on the whole terrestrial globe.
(There are intentional and

unintentional towns.)
It would have been quite enough, for instance, to

have the consciousness by which all so-called direct persons and men of

action live.
I bet you think I am writing all this from affectation, to

be witty at the expense of men of action; and what is more, that from

ill-bred affectation, I am clanking a sword like my officer.
But,

gentlemen, whoever can pride himself on his diseases and even swagger

over them?
Though, after all, everyone does do that; people do pride themselves on

their diseases, and I do, may be, more than anyone.
We will not dispute

it; my contention was absurd.
But yet I am firmly persuaded that a

great deal of consciousness, every sort of consciousness, in fact, is a

disease.
I stick to that.
Let us leave that, too, for a minute.
Tell me

this: why does it happen that at the very, yes, at the very moments

when I am most capable of feeling every refinement of all that is

“sublime and beautiful,” as they used to say at one time, it would, as

though of design, happen to me not only to feel but to do such ugly

things, such that ... Well, in short, actions that all, perhaps,

commit; but which, as though purposely, occurred to me at the very time

when I was most conscious that they ought not to be committed.
The more

conscious I was of goodness and of all that was “sublime and

beautiful,” the more deeply I sank into my mire and the more ready I

was to sink in it altogether.
But the chief point was that all this

was, as it were, not accidental in me, but as though it were bound to

be so.
It was as though it were my most normal condition, and not in

the least disease or depravity, so that at last all desire in me to

struggle against this depravity passed.
It ended by my almost believing

(perhaps actually believing) that this was perhaps my normal condition.
But at first, in the beginning, what agonies I endured in that

struggle!
I did not believe it was the same with other people, and all

my life I hid this fact about myself as a secret.
I was ashamed (even

now, perhaps, I am ashamed): I got to the point of feeling a sort of

secret abnormal, despicable enjoyment in returning home to my corner on

some disgusting Petersburg night, acutely conscious that that day I had

committed a loathsome action again, that what was done could never be

undone, and secretly, inwardly gnawing, gnawing at myself for it,

tearing and consuming myself till at last the bitterness turned into a

sort of shameful accursed sweetness, and at last—into positive real

enjoyment!
Yes, into enjoyment, into enjoyment!
I insist upon that.
I

have spoken of this because I keep wanting to know for a fact whether

other people feel such enjoyment?
I will explain; the enjoyment was

just from the too intense consciousness of one’s own degradation; it

was from feeling oneself that one had reached the last barrier, that it

was horrible, but that it could not be otherwise; that there was no

escape for you; that you never could become a different man; that even

if time and faith were still left you to change into something

different you would most likely not wish to change; or if you did wish

to, even then you would do nothing; because perhaps in reality there

was nothing for you to change into.
And the worst of it was, and the root of it all, that it was all in

accord with the normal fundamental laws of over-acute consciousness,

and with the inertia that was the direct result of those laws, and that

consequently one was not only unable to change but could do absolutely

nothing.
Thus it would follow, as the result of acute consciousness,

that one is not to blame in being a scoundrel; as though that were any

consolation to the scoundrel once he has come to realise that he

actually is a scoundrel.
But enough.... Ech, I have talked a lot of

nonsense, but what have I explained?
How is enjoyment in this to be

explained?
But I will explain it.
I will get to the bottom of it!
That

is why I have taken up my pen....
I, for instance, have a great deal of _amour propre_.
I am as

suspicious and prone to take offence as a humpback or a dwarf.
But upon

my word I sometimes have had moments when if I had happened to be

slapped in the face I should, perhaps, have been positively glad of it.
I say, in earnest, that I should probably have been able to discover

even in that a peculiar sort of enjoyment—the enjoyment, of course, of

despair; but in despair there are the most intense enjoyments,

especially when one is very acutely conscious of the hopelessness of

one’s position.
And when one is slapped in the face—why then the

consciousness of being rubbed into a pulp would positively overwhelm

one.
The worst of it is, look at it which way one will, it still turns

out that I was always the most to blame in everything.
And what is most

humiliating of all, to blame for no fault of my own but, so to say,

through the laws of nature.
In the first place, to blame because I am

cleverer than any of the people surrounding me.
(I have always

considered myself cleverer than any of the people surrounding me, and

sometimes, would you believe it, have been positively ashamed of it.
At

any rate, I have all my life, as it were, turned my eyes away and never

could look people straight in the face.)
To blame, finally, because

even if I had had magnanimity, I should only have had more suffering

from the sense of its uselessness.
I should certainly have never been

able to do anything from being magnanimous—neither to forgive, for my

assailant would perhaps have slapped me from the laws of nature, and

one cannot forgive the laws of nature; nor to forget, for even if it

were owing to the laws of nature, it is insulting all the same.
Finally, even if I had wanted to be anything but magnanimous, had

desired on the contrary to revenge myself on my assailant, I could not

have revenged myself on any one for anything because I should certainly

never have made up my mind to do anything, even if I had been able to.
Why should I not have made up my mind?
About that in particular I want

to say a few words.
III





With people who know how to revenge themselves and to stand up for

themselves in general, how is it done?
Why, when they are possessed,

let us suppose, by the feeling of revenge, then for the time there is

nothing else but that feeling left in their whole being.
Such a

gentleman simply dashes straight for his object like an infuriated bull

with its horns down, and nothing but a wall will stop him.
(By the way:

facing the wall, such gentlemen—that is, the “direct” persons and men

of action—are genuinely nonplussed.
For them a wall is not an evasion,

as for us people who think and consequently do nothing; it is not an

excuse for turning aside, an excuse for which we are always very glad,

though we scarcely believe in it ourselves, as a rule.
No, they are

nonplussed in all sincerity.
The wall has for them something

tranquillising, morally soothing, final—maybe even something mysterious

... but of the wall later.)
Well, such a direct person I regard as the real normal man, as his

tender mother nature wished to see him when she graciously brought him

into being on the earth.
I envy such a man till I am green in the face.
He is stupid.
I am not disputing that, but perhaps the normal man

should be stupid, how do you know?
Perhaps it is very beautiful, in

fact.
And I am the more persuaded of that suspicion, if one can call it

so, by the fact that if you take, for instance, the antithesis of the

normal man, that is, the man of acute consciousness, who has come, of

course, not out of the lap of nature but out of a retort (this is

almost mysticism, gentlemen, but I suspect this, too), this retort-made

man is sometimes so nonplussed in the presence of his antithesis that

with all his exaggerated consciousness he genuinely thinks of himself

as a mouse and not a man.
It may be an acutely conscious mouse, yet it

is a mouse, while the other is a man, and therefore, et caetera, et

caetera.
And the worst of it is, he himself, his very own self, looks

on himself as a mouse; no one asks him to do so; and that is an

important point.
Now let us look at this mouse in action.
Let us

suppose, for instance, that it feels insulted, too (and it almost

always does feel insulted), and wants to revenge itself, too.
There may

even be a greater accumulation of spite in it than in _l’homme de la

nature et de la vérité_.
The base and nasty desire to vent that spite

on its assailant rankles perhaps even more nastily in it than in

_l’homme de la nature et de la vérité_.
For through his innate

stupidity the latter looks upon his revenge as justice pure and simple;

while in consequence of his acute consciousness the mouse does not

believe in the justice of it.
To come at last to the deed itself, to

the very act of revenge.
Apart from the one fundamental nastiness the

luckless mouse succeeds in creating around it so many other nastinesses

in the form of doubts and questions, adds to the one question so many

unsettled questions that there inevitably works up around it a sort of

fatal brew, a stinking mess, made up of its doubts, emotions, and of

the contempt spat upon it by the direct men of action who stand

solemnly about it as judges and arbitrators, laughing at it till their

healthy sides ache.
Of course the only thing left for it is to dismiss

all that with a wave of its paw, and, with a smile of assumed contempt

in which it does not even itself believe, creep ignominiously into its

mouse-hole.
There in its nasty, stinking, underground home our

insulted, crushed and ridiculed mouse promptly becomes absorbed in

cold, malignant and, above all, everlasting spite.
For forty years

together it will remember its injury down to the smallest, most

ignominious details, and every time will add, of itself, details still

more ignominious, spitefully teasing and tormenting itself with its own

imagination.
It will itself be ashamed of its imaginings, but yet it

will recall it all, it will go over and over every detail, it will

invent unheard of things against itself, pretending that those things

might happen, and will forgive nothing.
Maybe it will begin to revenge

itself, too, but, as it were, piecemeal, in trivial ways, from behind

the stove, incognito, without believing either in its own right to

vengeance, or in the success of its revenge, knowing that from all its

efforts at revenge it will suffer a hundred times more than he on whom

it revenges itself, while he, I daresay, will not even scratch himself.
On its deathbed it will recall it all over again, with interest

accumulated over all the years and ...
But it is just in that cold, abominable half despair, half belief, in

that conscious burying oneself alive for grief in the underworld for

forty years, in that acutely recognised and yet partly doubtful

hopelessness of one’s position, in that hell of unsatisfied desires

turned inward, in that fever of oscillations, of resolutions determined

for ever and repented of again a minute later—that the savour of that

strange enjoyment of which I have spoken lies.
It is so subtle, so

difficult of analysis, that persons who are a little limited, or even

simply persons of strong nerves, will not understand a single atom of

it.
“Possibly,” you will add on your own account with a grin, “people

will not understand it either who have never received a slap in the

face,” and in that way you will politely hint to me that I, too,

perhaps, have had the experience of a slap in the face in my life, and

so I speak as one who knows.
I bet that you are thinking that.
But set

your minds at rest, gentlemen, I have not received a slap in the face,

though it is absolutely a matter of indifference to me what you may

think about it.
Possibly, I even regret, myself, that I have given so

few slaps in the face during my life.
But enough ... not another word

on that subject of such extreme interest to you.
I will continue calmly concerning persons with strong nerves who do not

understand a certain refinement of enjoyment.
Though in certain

circumstances these gentlemen bellow their loudest like bulls, though

this, let us suppose, does them the greatest credit, yet, as I have

said already, confronted with the impossible they subside at once.
The

impossible means the stone wall!
What stone wall?
Why, of course, the

laws of nature, the deductions of natural science, mathematics.
As soon

as they prove to you, for instance, that you are descended from a

monkey, then it is no use scowling, accept it for a fact.
When they

prove to you that in reality one drop of your own fat must be dearer to

you than a hundred thousand of your fellow-creatures, and that this

conclusion is the final solution of all so-called virtues and duties

and all such prejudices and fancies, then you have just to accept it,

there is no help for it, for twice two is a law of mathematics.
Just

try refuting it.
“Upon my word, they will shout at you, it is no use protesting: it is a

case of twice two makes four!
Nature does not ask your permission, she

has nothing to do with your wishes, and whether you like her laws or

dislike them, you are bound to accept her as she is, and consequently

all her conclusions.
A wall, you see, is a wall ... and so on, and so

on.”



Merciful Heavens!
but what do I care for the laws of nature and

arithmetic, when, for some reason I dislike those laws and the fact

that twice two makes four?
Of course I cannot break through the wall by

battering my head against it if I really have not the strength to knock

it down, but I am not going to be reconciled to it simply because it is

a stone wall and I have not the strength.
As though such a stone wall really were a consolation, and really did

contain some word of conciliation, simply because it is as true as

twice two makes four.
Oh, absurdity of absurdities!
How much better it

is to understand it all, to recognise it all, all the impossibilities

and the stone wall; not to be reconciled to one of those

impossibilities and stone walls if it disgusts you to be reconciled to

it; by the way of the most inevitable, logical combinations to reach

the most revolting conclusions on the everlasting theme, that even for

the stone wall you are yourself somehow to blame, though again it is as

clear as day you are not to blame in the least, and therefore grinding

your teeth in silent impotence to sink into luxurious inertia, brooding

on the fact that there is no one even for you to feel vindictive

against, that you have not, and perhaps never will have, an object for

your spite, that it is a sleight of hand, a bit of juggling, a

card-sharper’s trick, that it is simply a mess, no knowing what and no

knowing who, but in spite of all these uncertainties and jugglings,

still there is an ache in you, and the more you do not know, the worse

the ache.
IV





“Ha, ha, ha!
You will be finding enjoyment in toothache next,” you cry,

with a laugh.
“Well, even in toothache there is enjoyment,” I answer.
I had toothache

for a whole month and I know there is.
In that case, of course, people

are not spiteful in silence, but moan; but they are not candid moans,

they are malignant moans, and the malignancy is the whole point.
The

enjoyment of the sufferer finds expression in those moans; if he did

not feel enjoyment in them he would not moan.
It is a good example,

gentlemen, and I will develop it.
Those moans express in the first

place all the aimlessness of your pain, which is so humiliating to your

consciousness; the whole legal system of nature on which you spit

disdainfully, of course, but from which you suffer all the same while

she does not.
They express the consciousness that you have no enemy to

punish, but that you have pain; the consciousness that in spite of all

possible Wagenheims you are in complete slavery to your teeth; that if

someone wishes it, your teeth will leave off aching, and if he does

not, they will go on aching another three months; and that finally if

you are still contumacious and still protest, all that is left you for

your own gratification is to thrash yourself or beat your wall with

your fist as hard as you can, and absolutely nothing more.
Well, these

mortal insults, these jeers on the part of someone unknown, end at last

in an enjoyment which sometimes reaches the highest degree of

voluptuousness.
I ask you, gentlemen, listen sometimes to the moans of

an educated man of the nineteenth century suffering from toothache, on

the second or third day of the attack, when he is beginning to moan,

not as he moaned on the first day, that is, not simply because he has

toothache, not just as any coarse peasant, but as a man affected by

progress and European civilisation, a man who is “divorced from the

soil and the national elements,” as they express it now-a-days.
His

moans become nasty, disgustingly malignant, and go on for whole days

and nights.
And of course he knows himself that he is doing himself no

sort of good with his moans; he knows better than anyone that he is

only lacerating and harassing himself and others for nothing; he knows

that even the audience before whom he is making his efforts, and his

whole family, listen to him with loathing, do not put a ha’porth of

faith in him, and inwardly understand that he might moan differently,

more simply, without trills and flourishes, and that he is only amusing

himself like that from ill-humour, from malignancy.
Well, in all these

recognitions and disgraces it is that there lies a voluptuous pleasure.
As though he would say: “I am worrying you, I am lacerating your

hearts, I am keeping everyone in the house awake.
Well, stay awake

then, you, too, feel every minute that I have toothache.
I am not a

hero to you now, as I tried to seem before, but simply a nasty person,

an impostor.
Well, so be it, then!
I am very glad that you see through

me.
It is nasty for you to hear my despicable moans: well, let it be

nasty; here I will let you have a nastier flourish in a minute....” You

do not understand even now, gentlemen?
No, it seems our development and

our consciousness must go further to understand all the intricacies of

this pleasure.
You laugh?
Delighted.
My jests, gentlemen, are of course

in bad taste, jerky, involved, lacking self-confidence.
But of course

that is because I do not respect myself.
Can a man of perception

respect himself at all?
V





Come, can a man who attempts to find enjoyment in the very feeling of

his own degradation possibly have a spark of respect for himself?
I am

not saying this now from any mawkish kind of remorse.
And, indeed, I

could never endure saying, “Forgive me, Papa, I won’t do it again,” not

because I am incapable of saying that—on the contrary, perhaps just

because I have been too capable of it, and in what a way, too.
As

though of design I used to get into trouble in cases when I was not to

blame in any way.
That was the nastiest part of it.
At the same time I

was genuinely touched and penitent, I used to shed tears and, of

course, deceived myself, though I was not acting in the least and there

was a sick feeling in my heart at the time.... For that one could not

blame even the laws of nature, though the laws of nature have

continually all my life offended me more than anything.
It is loathsome

to remember it all, but it was loathsome even then.
Of course, a minute

or so later I would realise wrathfully that it was all a lie, a

revolting lie, an affected lie, that is, all this penitence, this

emotion, these vows of reform.
You will ask why did I worry myself with

such antics: answer, because it was very dull to sit with one’s hands

folded, and so one began cutting capers.
That is really it.
Observe

yourselves more carefully, gentlemen, then you will understand that it

is so.
I invented adventures for myself and made up a life, so as at

least to live in some way.
How many times it has happened to me—well,

for instance, to take offence simply on purpose, for nothing; and one

knows oneself, of course, that one is offended at nothing; that one is

putting it on, but yet one brings oneself at last to the point of being

really offended.
All my life I have had an impulse to play such pranks,

so that in the end I could not control it in myself.
Another time,

twice, in fact, I tried hard to be in love.
I suffered, too, gentlemen,

I assure you.
In the depth of my heart there was no faith in my

suffering, only a faint stir of mockery, but yet I did suffer, and in

the real, orthodox way; I was jealous, beside myself ... and it was all

from _ennui_, gentlemen, all from _ennui;_ inertia overcame me.
You

know the direct, legitimate fruit of consciousness is inertia, that is,

conscious sitting-with-the-hands-folded.
I have referred to this

already.
I repeat, I repeat with emphasis: all “direct” persons and men

of action are active just because they are stupid and limited.
How

explain that?
I will tell you: in consequence of their limitation they

take immediate and secondary causes for primary ones, and in that way

persuade themselves more quickly and easily than other people do that

they have found an infallible foundation for their activity, and their

minds are at ease and you know that is the chief thing.
To begin to

act, you know, you must first have your mind completely at ease and no

trace of doubt left in it.
Why, how am I, for example, to set my mind

at rest?
Where are the primary causes on which I am to build?
Where are

my foundations?
Where am I to get them from?
I exercise myself in

reflection, and consequently with me every primary cause at once draws

after itself another still more primary, and so on to infinity.
That is

just the essence of every sort of consciousness and reflection.
It must

be a case of the laws of nature again.
What is the result of it in the

end?
Why, just the same.
Remember I spoke just now of vengeance.
(I am

sure you did not take it in.)
I said that a man revenges himself

because he sees justice in it.
Therefore he has found a primary cause,

that is, justice.
And so he is at rest on all sides, and consequently

he carries out his revenge calmly and successfully, being persuaded

that he is doing a just and honest thing.
But I see no justice in it, I

find no sort of virtue in it either, and consequently if I attempt to

revenge myself, it is only out of spite.
Spite, of course, might

overcome everything, all my doubts, and so might serve quite

successfully in place of a primary cause, precisely because it is not a

cause.
But what is to be done if I have not even spite (I began with

that just now, you know).
In consequence again of those accursed laws

of consciousness, anger in me is subject to chemical disintegration.
You look into it, the object flies off into air, your reasons

evaporate, the criminal is not to be found, the wrong becomes not a

wrong but a phantom, something like the toothache, for which no one is

to blame, and consequently there is only the same outlet left

again—that is, to beat the wall as hard as you can.
So you give it up

with a wave of the hand because you have not found a fundamental cause.
And try letting yourself be carried away by your feelings, blindly,

without reflection, without a primary cause, repelling consciousness at

least for a time; hate or love, if only not to sit with your hands

folded.
The day after tomorrow, at the latest, you will begin despising

yourself for having knowingly deceived yourself.
Result: a soap-bubble

and inertia.
Oh, gentlemen, do you know, perhaps I consider myself an

intelligent man, only because all my life I have been able neither to

begin nor to finish anything.
Granted I am a babbler, a harmless

vexatious babbler, like all of us.
But what is to be done if the direct

and sole vocation of every intelligent man is babble, that is, the

intentional pouring of water through a sieve?
VI





Oh, if I had done nothing simply from laziness!
Heavens, how I should

have respected myself, then.
I should have respected myself because I

should at least have been capable of being lazy; there would at least

have been one quality, as it were, positive in me, in which I could

have believed myself.
Question: What is he?
Answer: A sluggard; how

very pleasant it would have been to hear that of oneself!
It would mean

that I was positively defined, it would mean that there was something

to say about me.
“Sluggard”—why, it is a calling and vocation, it is a

career.
Do not jest, it is so.
I should then be a member of the best

club by right, and should find my occupation in continually respecting

myself.
I knew a gentleman who prided himself all his life on being a

connoisseur of Lafitte.
He considered this as his positive virtue, and

never doubted himself.
He died, not simply with a tranquil, but with a

triumphant conscience, and he was quite right, too.
Then I should have

chosen a career for myself, I should have been a sluggard and a

glutton, not a simple one, but, for instance, one with sympathies for

everything sublime and beautiful.
How do you like that?
I have long had

visions of it.
That “sublime and beautiful” weighs heavily on my mind

at forty But that is at forty; then—oh, then it would have been

different!
I should have found for myself a form of activity in keeping

with it, to be precise, drinking to the health of everything “sublime

and beautiful.” I should have snatched at every opportunity to drop a

tear into my glass and then to drain it to all that is “sublime and

beautiful.” I should then have turned everything into the sublime and

the beautiful; in the nastiest, unquestionable trash, I should have

sought out the sublime and the beautiful.
I should have exuded tears

like a wet sponge.
An artist, for instance, paints a picture worthy of

Gay.
At once I drink to the health of the artist who painted the

picture worthy of Gay, because I love all that is “sublime and

beautiful.” An author has written _As you will:_ at once I drink to the

health of “anyone you will” because I love all that is “sublime and

beautiful.”



I should claim respect for doing so.
I should persecute anyone who

would not show me respect.
I should live at ease, I should die with

dignity, why, it is charming, perfectly charming!
And what a good round

belly I should have grown, what a treble chin I should have

established, what a ruby nose I should have coloured for myself, so

that everyone would have said, looking at me: “Here is an asset!
Here

is something real and solid!” And, say what you like, it is very

agreeable to hear such remarks about oneself in this negative age.
VII





But these are all golden dreams.
Oh, tell me, who was it first

announced, who was it first proclaimed, that man only does nasty things

because he does not know his own interests; and that if he were

enlightened, if his eyes were opened to his real normal interests, man

would at once cease to do nasty things, would at once become good and

noble because, being enlightened and understanding his real advantage,

he would see his own advantage in the good and nothing else, and we all

know that not one man can, consciously, act against his own interests,

consequently, so to say, through necessity, he would begin doing good?
Oh, the babe!
Oh, the pure, innocent child!
Why, in the first place,

when in all these thousands of years has there been a time when man has

acted only from his own interest?
What is to be done with the millions

of facts that bear witness that men, _consciously_, that is fully

understanding their real interests, have left them in the background

and have rushed headlong on another path, to meet peril and danger,

compelled to this course by nobody and by nothing, but, as it were,

simply disliking the beaten track, and have obstinately, wilfully,

struck out another difficult, absurd way, seeking it almost in the

darkness.
So, I suppose, this obstinacy and perversity were pleasanter

to them than any advantage....
Advantage!
What is advantage?
And will

you take it upon yourself to define with perfect accuracy in what the

advantage of man consists?
And what if it so happens that a man’s

advantage, _sometimes_, not only may, but even must, consist in his

desiring in certain cases what is harmful to himself and not

advantageous.
And if so, if there can be such a case, the whole

principle falls into dust.
What do you think—are there such cases?
You

laugh; laugh away, gentlemen, but only answer me: have man’s advantages

been reckoned up with perfect certainty?
Are there not some which not

only have not been included but cannot possibly be included under any

classification?
You see, you gentlemen have, to the best of my

knowledge, taken your whole register of human advantages from the

averages of statistical figures and politico-economical formulas.
Your

advantages are prosperity, wealth, freedom, peace—and so on, and so on.
So that the man who should, for instance, go openly and knowingly in

opposition to all that list would to your thinking, and indeed mine,

too, of course, be an obscurantist or an absolute madman: would not he?
But, you know, this is what is surprising: why does it so happen that

all these statisticians, sages and lovers of humanity, when they reckon

up human advantages invariably leave out one?
They don’t even take it

into their reckoning in the form in which it should be taken, and the

whole reckoning depends upon that.
It would be no greater matter, they

would simply have to take it, this advantage, and add it to the list.
But the trouble is, that this strange advantage does not fall under any

classification and is not in place in any list.
I have a friend for

instance ... Ech!
gentlemen, but of course he is your friend, too; and

indeed there is no one, no one to whom he is not a friend!
When he

prepares for any undertaking this gentleman immediately explains to

you, elegantly and clearly, exactly how he must act in accordance with

the laws of reason and truth.
What is more, he will talk to you with

excitement and passion of the true normal interests of man; with irony

he will upbraid the short-sighted fools who do not understand their own

interests, nor the true significance of virtue; and, within a quarter

of an hour, without any sudden outside provocation, but simply through

something inside him which is stronger than all his interests, he will

go off on quite a different tack—that is, act in direct opposition to

what he has just been saying about himself, in opposition to the laws

of reason, in opposition to his own advantage, in fact in opposition to

everything ...
I warn you that my friend is a compound personality and

therefore it is difficult to blame him as an individual.
The fact is,

gentlemen, it seems there must really exist something that is dearer to

almost every man than his greatest advantages, or (not to be illogical)

there is a most advantageous advantage (the very one omitted of which

we spoke just now) which is more important and more advantageous than

all other advantages, for the sake of which a man if necessary is ready

to act in opposition to all laws; that is, in opposition to reason,

honour, peace, prosperity—in fact, in opposition to all those excellent

and useful things if only he can attain that fundamental, most

advantageous advantage which is dearer to him than all.
“Yes, but it’s

advantage all the same,” you will retort.
But excuse me, I’ll make the

point clear, and it is not a case of playing upon words.
What matters

is, that this advantage is remarkable from the very fact that it breaks

down all our classifications, and continually shatters every system

constructed by lovers of mankind for the benefit of mankind.
In fact,

it upsets everything.
But before I mention this advantage to you, I

want to compromise myself personally, and therefore I boldly declare

that all these fine systems, all these theories for explaining to

mankind their real normal interests, in order that inevitably striving

to pursue these interests they may at once become good and noble—are,

in my opinion, so far, mere logical exercises!
Yes, logical exercises.
Why, to maintain this theory of the regeneration of mankind by means of

the pursuit of his own advantage is to my mind almost the same thing

... as to affirm, for instance, following Buckle, that through

civilisation mankind becomes softer, and consequently less bloodthirsty

and less fitted for warfare.
Logically it does seem to follow from his

arguments.
But man has such a predilection for systems and abstract

deductions that he is ready to distort the truth intentionally, he is

ready to deny the evidence of his senses only to justify his logic.
I

take this example because it is the most glaring instance of it.
Only

look about you: blood is being spilt in streams, and in the merriest

way, as though it were champagne.
Take the whole of the nineteenth

century in which Buckle lived.
Take Napoleon—the Great and also the

present one.
Take North America—the eternal union.
Take the farce of

Schleswig-Holstein.... And what is it that civilisation softens in us?
The only gain of civilisation for mankind is the greater capacity for

variety of sensations—and absolutely nothing more.
And through the

development of this many-sidedness man may come to finding enjoyment in

bloodshed.
In fact, this has already happened to him.
Have you noticed

that it is the most civilised gentlemen who have been the subtlest

slaughterers, to whom the Attilas and Stenka Razins could not hold a

candle, and if they are not so conspicuous as the Attilas and Stenka

Razins it is simply because they are so often met with, are so ordinary

and have become so familiar to us.
In any case civilisation has made

mankind if not more bloodthirsty, at least more vilely, more

loathsomely bloodthirsty.
In old days he saw justice in bloodshed and

with his conscience at peace exterminated those he thought proper.
Now

we do think bloodshed abominable and yet we engage in this abomination,

and with more energy than ever.
Which is worse?
Decide that for

yourselves.
They say that Cleopatra (excuse an instance from Roman

history) was fond of sticking gold pins into her slave-girls’ breasts

and derived gratification from their screams and writhings.
You will

say that that was in the comparatively barbarous times; that these are

barbarous times too, because also, comparatively speaking, pins are

stuck in even now; that though man has now learned to see more clearly

than in barbarous ages, he is still far from having learnt to act as

reason and science would dictate.
But yet you are fully convinced that

he will be sure to learn when he gets rid of certain old bad habits,

and when common sense and science have completely re-educated human

nature and turned it in a normal direction.
You are confident that then

man will cease from _intentional_ error and will, so to say, be

compelled not to want to set his will against his normal interests.
That is not all; then, you say, science itself will teach man (though

to my mind it’s a superfluous luxury) that he never has really had any

caprice or will of his own, and that he himself is something of the

nature of a piano-key or the stop of an organ, and that there are,

besides, things called the laws of nature; so that everything he does

is not done by his willing it, but is done of itself, by the laws of

nature.
Consequently we have only to discover these laws of nature, and

man will no longer have to answer for his actions and life will become

exceedingly easy for him.
All human actions will then, of course, be

tabulated according to these laws, mathematically, like tables of

logarithms up to 108,000, and entered in an index; or, better still,

there would be published certain edifying works of the nature of

encyclopaedic lexicons, in which everything will be so clearly

calculated and explained that there will be no more incidents or

adventures in the world.
Then—this is all what you say—new economic relations will be

established, all ready-made and worked out with mathematical

exactitude, so that every possible question will vanish in the

twinkling of an eye, simply because every possible answer to it will be

provided.
Then the “Palace of Crystal” will be built.
Then ...
In fact,

those will be halcyon days.
Of course there is no guaranteeing (this is

my comment) that it will not be, for instance, frightfully dull then

(for what will one have to do when everything will be calculated and

tabulated), but on the other hand everything will be extraordinarily

rational.
Of course boredom may lead you to anything.
It is boredom

sets one sticking golden pins into people, but all that would not

matter.
What is bad (this is my comment again) is that I dare say

people will be thankful for the gold pins then.
Man is stupid, you

know, phenomenally stupid; or rather he is not at all stupid, but he is

so ungrateful that you could not find another like him in all creation.
I, for instance, would not be in the least surprised if all of a

sudden, _à propos_ of nothing, in the midst of general prosperity a

gentleman with an ignoble, or rather with a reactionary and ironical,

countenance were to arise and, putting his arms akimbo, say to us all:

“I say, gentleman, hadn’t we better kick over the whole show and

scatter rationalism to the winds, simply to send these logarithms to

the devil, and to enable us to live once more at our own sweet foolish

will!” That again would not matter, but what is annoying is that he

would be sure to find followers—such is the nature of man.
And all that

for the most foolish reason, which, one would think, was hardly worth

mentioning: that is, that man everywhere and at all times, whoever he

may be, has preferred to act as he chose and not in the least as his

reason and advantage dictated.
And one may choose what is contrary to

one’s own interests, and sometimes one _positively ought_ (that is my

idea).
One’s own free unfettered choice, one’s own caprice, however

wild it may be, one’s own fancy worked up at times to frenzy—is that

very “most advantageous advantage” which we have overlooked, which

comes under no classification and against which all systems and

theories are continually being shattered to atoms.
And how do these

wiseacres know that man wants a normal, a virtuous choice?
What has

made them conceive that man must want a rationally advantageous choice?
What man wants is simply _independent_ choice, whatever that

independence may cost and wherever it may lead.
And choice, of course,

the devil only knows what choice.
VIII





“Ha!
ha!
ha!
But you know there is no such thing as choice in reality,

say what you like,” you will interpose with a chuckle.
“Science has

succeeded in so far analysing man that we know already that choice and

what is called freedom of will is nothing else than—”



Stay, gentlemen, I meant to begin with that myself I confess, I was

rather frightened.
I was just going to say that the devil only knows

what choice depends on, and that perhaps that was a very good thing,

but I remembered the teaching of science ... and pulled myself up.
And

here you have begun upon it.
Indeed, if there really is some day

discovered a formula for all our desires and caprices—that is, an

explanation of what they depend upon, by what laws they arise, how they

develop, what they are aiming at in one case and in another and so on,

that is a real mathematical formula—then, most likely, man will at once

cease to feel desire, indeed, he will be certain to.
For who would want

to choose by rule?
Besides, he will at once be transformed from a human

being into an organ-stop or something of the sort; for what is a man

without desires, without free will and without choice, if not a stop in

an organ?
What do you think?
Let us reckon the chances—can such a thing

happen or not?
“H’m!” you decide.
“Our choice is usually mistaken from a false view of

our advantage.
We sometimes choose absolute nonsense because in our

foolishness we see in that nonsense the easiest means for attaining a

supposed advantage.
But when all that is explained and worked out on

paper (which is perfectly possible, for it is contemptible and

senseless to suppose that some laws of nature man will never

understand), then certainly so-called desires will no longer exist.
For

if a desire should come into conflict with reason we shall then reason

and not desire, because it will be impossible retaining our reason to

be _senseless_ in our desires, and in that way knowingly act against

reason and desire to injure ourselves.
And as all choice and reasoning

can be really calculated—because there will some day be discovered the

laws of our so-called free will—so, joking apart, there may one day be

something like a table constructed of them, so that we really shall

choose in accordance with it.
If, for instance, some day they calculate

and prove to me that I made a long nose at someone because I could not

help making a long nose at him and that I had to do it in that

particular way, what _freedom_ is left me, especially if I am a learned

man and have taken my degree somewhere?
Then I should be able to

calculate my whole life for thirty years beforehand.
In short, if this

could be arranged there would be nothing left for us to do; anyway, we

should have to understand that.
And, in fact, we ought unwearyingly to

repeat to ourselves that at such and such a time and in such and such

circumstances nature does not ask our leave; that we have got to take

her as she is and not fashion her to suit our fancy, and if we really

aspire to formulas and tables of rules, and well, even ... to the

chemical retort, there’s no help for it, we must accept the retort too,

or else it will be accepted without our consent....”



Yes, but here I come to a stop!
Gentlemen, you must excuse me for being

over-philosophical; it’s the result of forty years underground!
Allow

me to indulge my fancy.
You see, gentlemen, reason is an excellent

thing, there’s no disputing that, but reason is nothing but reason and

satisfies only the rational side of man’s nature, while will is a

manifestation of the whole life, that is, of the whole human life

including reason and all the impulses.
And although our life, in this

manifestation of it, is often worthless, yet it is life and not simply

extracting square roots.
Here I, for instance, quite naturally want to

live, in order to satisfy all my capacities for life, and not simply my

capacity for reasoning, that is, not simply one twentieth of my

capacity for life.
What does reason know?
Reason only knows what it has

succeeded in learning (some things, perhaps, it will never learn; this

is a poor comfort, but why not say so frankly?)
and human nature acts

as a whole, with everything that is in it, consciously or

unconsciously, and, even if it goes wrong, it lives.
I suspect,

gentlemen, that you are looking at me with compassion; you tell me

again that an enlightened and developed man, such, in short, as the

future man will be, cannot consciously desire anything disadvantageous

to himself, that that can be proved mathematically.
I thoroughly agree,

it can—by mathematics.
But I repeat for the hundredth time, there is

one case, one only, when man may consciously, purposely, desire what is

injurious to himself, what is stupid, very stupid—simply in order to

have the right to desire for himself even what is very stupid and not

to be bound by an obligation to desire only what is sensible.
Of

course, this very stupid thing, this caprice of ours, may be in

reality, gentlemen, more advantageous for us than anything else on

earth, especially in certain cases.
And in particular it may be more

advantageous than any advantage even when it does us obvious harm, and

contradicts the soundest conclusions of our reason concerning our

advantage—for in any circumstances it preserves for us what is most

precious and most important—that is, our personality, our

individuality.
Some, you see, maintain that this really is the most

precious thing for mankind; choice can, of course, if it chooses, be in

agreement with reason; and especially if this be not abused but kept

within bounds.
It is profitable and sometimes even praiseworthy.
But

very often, and even most often, choice is utterly and stubbornly

opposed to reason ... and ... and ... do you know that that, too, is

profitable, sometimes even praiseworthy?
Gentlemen, let us suppose that

man is not stupid.
(Indeed one cannot refuse to suppose that, if only

from the one consideration, that, if man is stupid, then who is wise?)
But if he is not stupid, he is monstrously ungrateful!
Phenomenally

ungrateful.
In fact, I believe that the best definition of man is the

ungrateful biped.
But that is not all, that is not his worst defect;

his worst defect is his perpetual moral obliquity, perpetual—from the

days of the Flood to the Schleswig-Holstein period.
Moral obliquity and

consequently lack of good sense; for it has long been accepted that

lack of good sense is due to no other cause than moral obliquity.
Put

it to the test and cast your eyes upon the history of mankind.
What

will you see?
Is it a grand spectacle?
Grand, if you like.
Take the

Colossus of Rhodes, for instance, that’s worth something.
With good

reason Mr. Anaevsky testifies of it that some say that it is the work

of man’s hands, while others maintain that it has been created by

nature herself.
Is it many-coloured?
May be it is many-coloured, too:

if one takes the dress uniforms, military and civilian, of all peoples

in all ages—that alone is worth something, and if you take the undress

uniforms you will never get to the end of it; no historian would be

equal to the job.
Is it monotonous?
May be it’s monotonous too: it’s

fighting and fighting; they are fighting now, they fought first and

they fought last—you will admit, that it is almost too monotonous.
In

short, one may say anything about the history of the world—anything

that might enter the most disordered imagination.
The only thing one

can’t say is that it’s rational.
The very word sticks in one’s throat.
And, indeed, this is the odd thing that is continually happening: there

are continually turning up in life moral and rational persons, sages

and lovers of humanity who make it their object to live all their lives

as morally and rationally as possible, to be, so to speak, a light to

their neighbours simply in order to show them that it is possible to

live morally and rationally in this world.
And yet we all know that

those very people sooner or later have been false to themselves,

playing some queer trick, often a most unseemly one.
Now I ask you:

what can be expected of man since he is a being endowed with strange

qualities?
Shower upon him every earthly blessing, drown him in a sea

of happiness, so that nothing but bubbles of bliss can be seen on the

surface; give him economic prosperity, such that he should have nothing

else to do but sleep, eat cakes and busy himself with the continuation

of his species, and even then out of sheer ingratitude, sheer spite,

man would play you some nasty trick.
He would even risk his cakes and

would deliberately desire the most fatal rubbish, the most uneconomical

absurdity, simply to introduce into all this positive good sense his

fatal fantastic element.
It is just his fantastic dreams, his vulgar

folly that he will desire to retain, simply in order to prove to

himself—as though that were so necessary—that men still are men and not

the keys of a piano, which the laws of nature threaten to control so

completely that soon one will be able to desire nothing but by the

calendar.
And that is not all: even if man really were nothing but a

piano-key, even if this were proved to him by natural science and

mathematics, even then he would not become reasonable, but would

purposely do something perverse out of simple ingratitude, simply to

gain his point.
And if he does not find means he will contrive

destruction and chaos, will contrive sufferings of all sorts, only to

gain his point!
He will launch a curse upon the world, and as only man

can curse (it is his privilege, the primary distinction between him and

other animals), may be by his curse alone he will attain his

object—that is, convince himself that he is a man and not a piano-key!
If you say that all this, too, can be calculated and tabulated—chaos

and darkness and curses, so that the mere possibility of calculating it

all beforehand would stop it all, and reason would reassert itself,

then man would purposely go mad in order to be rid of reason and gain

his point!
I believe in it, I answer for it, for the whole work of man

really seems to consist in nothing but proving to himself every minute

that he is a man and not a piano-key!
It may be at the cost of his

skin, it may be by cannibalism!
And this being so, can one help being

tempted to rejoice that it has not yet come off, and that desire still

depends on something we don’t know?
You will scream at me (that is, if you condescend to do so) that no one

is touching my free will, that all they are concerned with is that my

will should of itself, of its own free will, coincide with my own

normal interests, with the laws of nature and arithmetic.
Good heavens, gentlemen, what sort of free will is left when we come to

tabulation and arithmetic, when it will all be a case of twice two make

four?
Twice two makes four without my will.
As if free will meant that!
IX





Gentlemen, I am joking, and I know myself that my jokes are not

brilliant, but you know one can take everything as a joke.
I am,

perhaps, jesting against the grain.
Gentlemen, I am tormented by

questions; answer them for me.
You, for instance, want to cure men of

their old habits and reform their will in accordance with science and

good sense.
But how do you know, not only that it is possible, but also

that it is _desirable_ to reform man in that way?
And what leads you to

the conclusion that man’s inclinations _need_ reforming?
In short, how

do you know that such a reformation will be a benefit to man?
And to go

to the root of the matter, why are you so positively convinced that not

to act against his real normal interests guaranteed by the conclusions

of reason and arithmetic is certainly always advantageous for man and

must always be a law for mankind?
So far, you know, this is only your

supposition.
It may be the law of logic, but not the law of humanity.
You think, gentlemen, perhaps that I am mad?
Allow me to defend myself.
I agree that man is pre-eminently a creative animal, predestined to

strive consciously for an object and to engage in engineering—that is,

incessantly and eternally to make new roads, _wherever they may lead_.
But the reason why he wants sometimes to go off at a tangent may just

be that he is _predestined_ to make the road, and perhaps, too, that

however stupid the “direct” practical man may be, the thought sometimes

will occur to him that the road almost always does lead _somewhere_,

and that the destination it leads to is less important than the process

of making it, and that the chief thing is to save the well-conducted

child from despising engineering, and so giving way to the fatal

idleness, which, as we all know, is the mother of all the vices.
Man

likes to make roads and to create, that is a fact beyond dispute.
But

why has he such a passionate love for destruction and chaos also?
Tell

me that!
But on that point I want to say a couple of words myself.
May

it not be that he loves chaos and destruction (there can be no

disputing that he does sometimes love it) because he is instinctively

afraid of attaining his object and completing the edifice he is

constructing?
Who knows, perhaps he only loves that edifice from a

distance, and is by no means in love with it at close quarters; perhaps

he only loves building it and does not want to live in it, but will

leave it, when completed, for the use of _les animaux domestiques_—such

as the ants, the sheep, and so on.
Now the ants have quite a different

taste.
They have a marvellous edifice of that pattern which endures for

ever—the ant-heap.
With the ant-heap the respectable race of ants began and with the

ant-heap they will probably end, which does the greatest credit to

their perseverance and good sense.
But man is a frivolous and

incongruous creature, and perhaps, like a chess player, loves the

process of the game, not the end of it.
And who knows (there is no

saying with certainty), perhaps the only goal on earth to which mankind

is striving lies in this incessant process of attaining, in other

words, in life itself, and not in the thing to be attained, which must

always be expressed as a formula, as positive as twice two makes four,

and such positiveness is not life, gentlemen, but is the beginning of

death.
Anyway, man has always been afraid of this mathematical

certainty, and I am afraid of it now.
Granted that man does nothing but

seek that mathematical certainty, he traverses oceans, sacrifices his

life in the quest, but to succeed, really to find it, dreads, I assure

you.
He feels that when he has found it there will be nothing for him

to look for.
When workmen have finished their work they do at least

receive their pay, they go to the tavern, then they are taken to the

police-station—and there is occupation for a week.
But where can man

go?
Anyway, one can observe a certain awkwardness about him when he has

attained such objects.
He loves the process of attaining, but does not

quite like to have attained, and that, of course, is very absurd.
In

fact, man is a comical creature; there seems to be a kind of jest in it

all.
But yet mathematical certainty is after all, something

insufferable.
Twice two makes four seems to me simply a piece of

insolence.
Twice two makes four is a pert coxcomb who stands with arms

akimbo barring your path and spitting.
I admit that twice two makes

four is an excellent thing, but if we are to give everything its due,

twice two makes five is sometimes a very charming thing too.
And why are you so firmly, so triumphantly, convinced that only the

normal and the positive—in other words, only what is conducive to

welfare—is for the advantage of man?
Is not reason in error as regards

advantage?
Does not man, perhaps, love something besides well-being?
Perhaps he is just as fond of suffering?
Perhaps suffering is just as

great a benefit to him as well-being?
Man is sometimes extraordinarily,

passionately, in love with suffering, and that is a fact.
There is no

need to appeal to universal history to prove that; only ask yourself,

if you are a man and have lived at all.
As far as my personal opinion

is concerned, to care only for well-being seems to me positively

ill-bred.
Whether it’s good or bad, it is sometimes very pleasant, too,

to smash things.
I hold no brief for suffering nor for well-being

either.
I am standing for ... my caprice, and for its being guaranteed

to me when necessary.
Suffering would be out of place in vaudevilles,

for instance; I know that.
In the “Palace of Crystal” it is

unthinkable; suffering means doubt, negation, and what would be the

good of a “palace of crystal” if there could be any doubt about it?
And

yet I think man will never renounce real suffering, that is,

destruction and chaos.
Why, suffering is the sole origin of

consciousness.
Though I did lay it down at the beginning that

consciousness is the greatest misfortune for man, yet I know man prizes

it and would not give it up for any satisfaction.
Consciousness, for

instance, is infinitely superior to twice two makes four.
Once you have

mathematical certainty there is nothing left to do or to understand.
There will be nothing left but to bottle up your five senses and plunge

into contemplation.
While if you stick to consciousness, even though

the same result is attained, you can at least flog yourself at times,

and that will, at any rate, liven you up.
Reactionary as it is,

corporal punishment is better than nothing.
X





You believe in a palace of crystal that can never be destroyed—a palace

at which one will not be able to put out one’s tongue or make a long

nose on the sly.
And perhaps that is just why I am afraid of this

edifice, that it is of crystal and can never be destroyed and that one

cannot put one’s tongue out at it even on the sly.
You see, if it were not a palace, but a hen-house, I might creep into

it to avoid getting wet, and yet I would not call the hen-house a

palace out of gratitude to it for keeping me dry.
You laugh and say

that in such circumstances a hen-house is as good as a mansion.
Yes, I

answer, if one had to live simply to keep out of the rain.
But what is to be done if I have taken it into my head that that is not

the only object in life, and that if one must live one had better live

in a mansion?
That is my choice, my desire.
You will only eradicate it

when you have changed my preference.
Well, do change it, allure me with

something else, give me another ideal.
But meanwhile I will not take a

hen-house for a mansion.
The palace of crystal may be an idle dream, it

may be that it is inconsistent with the laws of nature and that I have

invented it only through my own stupidity, through the old-fashioned

irrational habits of my generation.
But what does it matter to me that

it is inconsistent?
That makes no difference since it exists in my

desires, or rather exists as long as my desires exist.
Perhaps you are

laughing again?
Laugh away; I will put up with any mockery rather than

pretend that I am satisfied when I am hungry.
I know, anyway, that I

will not be put off with a compromise, with a recurring zero, simply

because it is consistent with the laws of nature and actually exists.
I

will not accept as the crown of my desires a block of buildings with

tenements for the poor on a lease of a thousand years, and perhaps with

a sign-board of a dentist hanging out.
Destroy my desires, eradicate my

ideals, show me something better, and I will follow you.
You will say,

perhaps, that it is not worth your trouble; but in that case I can give

you the same answer.
We are discussing things seriously; but if you

won’t deign to give me your attention, I will drop your acquaintance.
I

can retreat into my underground hole.
But while I am alive and have desires I would rather my hand were

withered off than bring one brick to such a building!
Don’t remind me

that I have just rejected the palace of crystal for the sole reason

that one cannot put out one’s tongue at it.
I did not say because I am

so fond of putting my tongue out.
Perhaps the thing I resented was,

that of all your edifices there has not been one at which one could not

put out one’s tongue.
On the contrary, I would let my tongue be cut off

out of gratitude if things could be so arranged that I should lose all

desire to put it out.
It is not my fault that things cannot be so

arranged, and that one must be satisfied with model flats.
Then why am

I made with such desires?
Can I have been constructed simply in order

to come to the conclusion that all my construction is a cheat?
Can this

be my whole purpose?
I do not believe it.
But do you know what: I am convinced that we underground folk ought to

be kept on a curb.
Though we may sit forty years underground without

speaking, when we do come out into the light of day and break out we

talk and talk and talk....









XI





The long and the short of it is, gentlemen, that it is better to do

nothing!
Better conscious inertia!
And so hurrah for underground!
Though I have said that I envy the normal man to the last drop of my

bile, yet I should not care to be in his place such as he is now

(though I shall not cease envying him).
No, no; anyway the underground

life is more advantageous.
There, at any rate, one can ... Oh, but even

now I am lying!
I am lying because I know myself that it is not

underground that is better, but something different, quite different,

for which I am thirsting, but which I cannot find!
Damn underground!
I will tell you another thing that would be better, and that is, if I

myself believed in anything of what I have just written.
I swear to

you, gentlemen, there is not one thing, not one word of what I have

written that I really believe.
That is, I believe it, perhaps, but at

the same time I feel and suspect that I am lying like a cobbler.
“Then why have you written all this?” you will say to me.
“I ought to

put you underground for forty years without anything to do and then

come to you in your cellar, to find out what stage you have reached!
How can a man be left with nothing to do for forty years?”



“Isn’t that shameful, isn’t that humiliating?” you will say, perhaps,

wagging your heads contemptuously.
“You thirst for life and try to

settle the problems of life by a logical tangle.
And how persistent,

how insolent are your sallies, and at the same time what a scare you

are in!
You talk nonsense and are pleased with it; you say impudent

things and are in continual alarm and apologising for them.
You declare

that you are afraid of nothing and at the same time try to ingratiate

yourself in our good opinion.
You declare that you are gnashing your

teeth and at the same time you try to be witty so as to amuse us.
You

know that your witticisms are not witty, but you are evidently well

satisfied with their literary value.
You may, perhaps, have really

suffered, but you have no respect for your own suffering.
You may have

sincerity, but you have no modesty; out of the pettiest vanity you

expose your sincerity to publicity and ignominy.
You doubtlessly mean

to say something, but hide your last word through fear, because you

have not the resolution to utter it, and only have a cowardly

impudence.
You boast of consciousness, but you are not sure of your

ground, for though your mind works, yet your heart is darkened and

corrupt, and you cannot have a full, genuine consciousness without a

pure heart.
And how intrusive you are, how you insist and grimace!
Lies, lies, lies!”



Of course I have myself made up all the things you say.
That, too, is

from underground.
I have been for forty years listening to you through

a crack under the floor.
I have invented them myself, there was nothing

else I could invent.
It is no wonder that I have learned it by heart

and it has taken a literary form....
But can you really be so credulous as to think that I will print all

this and give it to you to read too?
And another problem: why do I call

you “gentlemen,” why do I address you as though you really were my

readers?
Such confessions as I intend to make are never printed nor

given to other people to read.
Anyway, I am not strong-minded enough

for that, and I don’t see why I should be.
But you see a fancy has

occurred to me and I want to realise it at all costs.
Let me explain.
Every man has reminiscences which he would not tell to everyone, but

only to his friends.
He has other matters in his mind which he would

not reveal even to his friends, but only to himself, and that in

secret.
But there are other things which a man is afraid to tell even

to himself, and every decent man has a number of such things stored

away in his mind.
The more decent he is, the greater the number of such

things in his mind.
Anyway, I have only lately determined to remember

some of my early adventures.
Till now I have always avoided them, even

with a certain uneasiness.
Now, when I am not only recalling them, but

have actually decided to write an account of them, I want to try the

experiment whether one can, even with oneself, be perfectly open and

not take fright at the whole truth.
I will observe, in parenthesis,

that Heine says that a true autobiography is almost an impossibility,

and that man is bound to lie about himself.
He considers that Rousseau

certainly told lies about himself in his confessions, and even

intentionally lied, out of vanity.
I am convinced that Heine is right;

I quite understand how sometimes one may, out of sheer vanity,

attribute regular crimes to oneself, and indeed I can very well

conceive that kind of vanity.
But Heine judged of people who made their

confessions to the public.
I write only for myself, and I wish to

declare once and for all that if I write as though I were addressing

readers, that is simply because it is easier for me to write in that

form.
It is a form, an empty form—I shall never have readers.
I have

made this plain already ...
I don’t wish to be hampered by any restrictions in the compilation of

my notes.
I shall not attempt any system or method.
I will jot things

down as I remember them.
But here, perhaps, someone will catch at the word and ask me: if you

really don’t reckon on readers, why do you make such compacts with

yourself—and on paper too—that is, that you won’t attempt any system or

method, that you jot things down as you remember them, and so on, and

so on?
Why are you explaining?
Why do you apologise?
Well, there it is, I answer.
There is a whole psychology in all this, though.
Perhaps it is simply

that I am a coward.
And perhaps that I purposely imagine an audience

before me in order that I may be more dignified while I write.
There

are perhaps thousands of reasons.
Again, what is my object precisely in

writing?
If it is not for the benefit of the public why should I not

simply recall these incidents in my own mind without putting them on

paper?
Quite so; but yet it is more imposing on paper.
There is something more

impressive in it; I shall be better able to criticise myself and

improve my style.
Besides, I shall perhaps obtain actual relief from

writing.
Today, for instance, I am particularly oppressed by one memory

of a distant past.
It came back vividly to my mind a few days ago, and

has remained haunting me like an annoying tune that one cannot get rid

of.
And yet I must get rid of it somehow.
I have hundreds of such

reminiscences; but at times some one stands out from the hundred and

oppresses me.
For some reason I believe that if I write it down I

should get rid of it.
Why not try?
Besides, I am bored, and I never have anything to do.
Writing will be a

sort of work.
They say work makes man kind-hearted and honest.
Well,

here is a chance for me, anyway.
Snow is falling today, yellow and dingy.
It fell yesterday, too, and a

few days ago.
I fancy it is the wet snow that has reminded me of that

incident which I cannot shake off now.
And so let it be a story _à

propos_ of the falling snow.
PART II

À Propos of the Wet Snow





When from dark error’s subjugation

My words of passionate exhortation

    Had wrenched thy fainting spirit free;

And writhing prone in thine affliction

Thou didst recall with malediction

    The vice that had encompassed thee:

And when thy slumbering conscience, fretting

    By recollection’s torturing flame,

Thou didst reveal the hideous setting

    Of thy life’s current ere I came:

When suddenly I saw thee sicken,

    And weeping, hide thine anguished face,

Revolted, maddened, horror-stricken,

    At memories of foul disgrace.
NEKRASSOV (_translated by Juliet Soskice_).
I





At that time I was only twenty-four.
My life was even then gloomy,

ill-regulated, and as solitary as that of a savage.
I made friends with

no one and positively avoided talking, and buried myself more and more

in my hole.
At work in the office I never looked at anyone, and was

perfectly well aware that my companions looked upon me, not only as a

queer fellow, but even looked upon me—I always fancied this—with a sort

of loathing.
I sometimes wondered why it was that nobody except me

fancied that he was looked upon with aversion?
One of the clerks had a

most repulsive, pock-marked face, which looked positively villainous.
I

believe I should not have dared to look at anyone with such an

unsightly countenance.
Another had such a very dirty old uniform that

there was an unpleasant odour in his proximity.
Yet not one of these

gentlemen showed the slightest self-consciousness—either about their

clothes or their countenance or their character in any way.
Neither of

them ever imagined that they were looked at with repulsion; if they had

imagined it they would not have minded—so long as their superiors did

not look at them in that way.
It is clear to me now that, owing to my

unbounded vanity and to the high standard I set for myself, I often

looked at myself with furious discontent, which verged on loathing, and

so I inwardly attributed the same feeling to everyone.
I hated my face,

for instance: I thought it disgusting, and even suspected that there

was something base in my expression, and so every day when I turned up

at the office I tried to behave as independently as possible, and to

assume a lofty expression, so that I might not be suspected of being

abject.
“My face may be ugly,” I thought, “but let it be lofty,

expressive, and, above all, _extremely_ intelligent.” But I was

positively and painfully certain that it was impossible for my

countenance ever to express those qualities.
And what was worst of all,

I thought it actually stupid looking, and I would have been quite

satisfied if I could have looked intelligent.
In fact, I would even

have put up with looking base if, at the same time, my face could have

been thought strikingly intelligent.
Of course, I hated my fellow clerks one and all, and I despised them

all, yet at the same time I was, as it were, afraid of them.
In fact,

it happened at times that I thought more highly of them than of myself.
It somehow happened quite suddenly that I alternated between despising

them and thinking them superior to myself.
A cultivated and decent man

cannot be vain without setting a fearfully high standard for himself,

and without despising and almost hating himself at certain moments.
But

whether I despised them or thought them superior I dropped my eyes

almost every time I met anyone.
I even made experiments whether I could

face so and so’s looking at me, and I was always the first to drop my

eyes.
This worried me to distraction.
I had a sickly dread, too, of

being ridiculous, and so had a slavish passion for the conventional in

everything external.
I loved to fall into the common rut, and had a

whole-hearted terror of any kind of eccentricity in myself.
But how

could I live up to it?
I was morbidly sensitive as a man of our age

should be.
They were all stupid, and as like one another as so many

sheep.
Perhaps I was the only one in the office who fancied that I was

a coward and a slave, and I fancied it just because I was more highly

developed.
But it was not only that I fancied it, it really was so.
I

was a coward and a slave.
I say this without the slightest

embarrassment.
Every decent man of our age must be a coward and a

slave.
That is his normal condition.
Of that I am firmly persuaded.
He

is made and constructed to that very end.
And not only at the present

time owing to some casual circumstances, but always, at all times, a

decent man is bound to be a coward and a slave.
It is the law of nature

for all decent people all over the earth.
If anyone of them happens to

be valiant about something, he need not be comforted nor carried away

by that; he would show the white feather just the same before something

else.
That is how it invariably and inevitably ends.
Only donkeys and

mules are valiant, and they only till they are pushed up to the wall.
It is not worth while to pay attention to them for they really are of

no consequence.
Another circumstance, too, worried me in those days: that there was no

one like me and I was unlike anyone else.
“I am alone and they are

_everyone_,” I thought—and pondered.
From that it is evident that I was still a youngster.
The very opposite sometimes happened.
It was loathsome sometimes to go

to the office; things reached such a point that I often came home ill.
But all at once, _à propos_ of nothing, there would come a phase of

scepticism and indifference (everything happened in phases to me), and

I would laugh myself at my intolerance and fastidiousness, I would

reproach myself with being _romantic_.
At one time I was unwilling to

speak to anyone, while at other times I would not only talk, but go to

the length of contemplating making friends with them.
All my

fastidiousness would suddenly, for no rhyme or reason, vanish.
Who

knows, perhaps I never had really had it, and it had simply been

affected, and got out of books.
I have not decided that question even

now.
Once I quite made friends with them, visited their homes, played

preference, drank vodka, talked of promotions....
But here let me make

a digression.
We Russians, speaking generally, have never had those foolish

transcendental “romantics”—German, and still more French—on whom

nothing produces any effect; if there were an earthquake, if all France

perished at the barricades, they would still be the same, they would

not even have the decency to affect a change, but would still go on

singing their transcendental songs to the hour of their death, because

they are fools.
We, in Russia, have no fools; that is well known.
That

is what distinguishes us from foreign lands.
Consequently these

transcendental natures are not found amongst us in their pure form.
The

idea that they are is due to our “realistic” journalists and critics of

that day, always on the look out for Kostanzhoglos and Uncle Pyotr

Ivanitchs and foolishly accepting them as our ideal; they have

slandered our romantics, taking them for the same transcendental sort

as in Germany or France.
On the contrary, the characteristics of our

“romantics” are absolutely and directly opposed to the transcendental

European type, and no European standard can be applied to them.
(Allow

me to make use of this word “romantic”—an old-fashioned and much

respected word which has done good service and is familiar to all.)
The

characteristics of our romantic are to understand everything, _to see

everything and to see it often incomparably more clearly than our most

realistic minds see it;_ to refuse to accept anyone or anything, but at

the same time not to despise anything; to give way, to yield, from

policy; never to lose sight of a useful practical object (such as

rent-free quarters at the government expense, pensions, decorations),

to keep their eye on that object through all the enthusiasms and

volumes of lyrical poems, and at the same time to preserve “the sublime

and the beautiful” inviolate within them to the hour of their death,

and to preserve themselves also, incidentally, like some precious jewel

wrapped in cotton wool if only for the benefit of “the sublime and the

beautiful.” Our “romantic” is a man of great breadth and the greatest

rogue of all our rogues, I assure you....
I can assure you from

experience, indeed.
Of course, that is, if he is intelligent.
But what

am I saying!
The romantic is always intelligent, and I only meant to

observe that although we have had foolish romantics they don’t count,

and they were only so because in the flower of their youth they

degenerated into Germans, and to preserve their precious jewel more

comfortably, settled somewhere out there—by preference in Weimar or the

Black Forest.
I, for instance, genuinely despised my official work and did not openly

abuse it simply because I was in it myself and got a salary for it.
Anyway, take note, I did not openly abuse it.
Our romantic would rather

go out of his mind—a thing, however, which very rarely happens—than

take to open abuse, unless he had some other career in view; and he is

never kicked out.
At most, they would take him to the lunatic asylum as

“the King of Spain” if he should go very mad.
But it is only the thin,

fair people who go out of their minds in Russia.
Innumerable

“romantics” attain later in life to considerable rank in the service.
Their many-sidedness is remarkable!
And what a faculty they have for

the most contradictory sensations!
I was comforted by this thought even

in those days, and I am of the same opinion now.
That is why there are

so many “broad natures” among us who never lose their ideal even in the

depths of degradation; and though they never stir a finger for their

ideal, though they are arrant thieves and knaves, yet they tearfully

cherish their first ideal and are extraordinarily honest at heart.
Yes,

it is only among us that the most incorrigible rogue can be absolutely

and loftily honest at heart without in the least ceasing to be a rogue.
I repeat, our romantics, frequently, become such accomplished rascals

(I use the term “rascals” affectionately), suddenly display such a

sense of reality and practical knowledge that their bewildered

superiors and the public generally can only ejaculate in amazement.
Their many-sidedness is really amazing, and goodness knows what it may

develop into later on, and what the future has in store for us.
It is

not a poor material!
I do not say this from any foolish or boastful

patriotism.
But I feel sure that you are again imagining that I am

joking.
Or perhaps it’s just the contrary and you are convinced that I

really think so.
Anyway, gentlemen, I shall welcome both views as an

honour and a special favour.
And do forgive my digression.
I did not, of course, maintain friendly relations with my comrades and

soon was at loggerheads with them, and in my youth and inexperience I

even gave up bowing to them, as though I had cut off all relations.
That, however, only happened to me once.
As a rule, I was always alone.
In the first place I spent most of my time at home, reading.
I tried to

stifle all that was continually seething within me by means of external

impressions.
And the only external means I had was reading.
Reading, of

course, was a great help—exciting me, giving me pleasure and pain.
But

at times it bored me fearfully.
One longed for movement in spite of

everything, and I plunged all at once into dark, underground, loathsome

vice of the pettiest kind.
My wretched passions were acute, smarting,

from my continual, sickly irritability I had hysterical impulses, with

tears and convulsions.
I had no resource except reading, that is, there

was nothing in my surroundings which I could respect and which

attracted me.
I was overwhelmed with depression, too; I had an

hysterical craving for incongruity and for contrast, and so I took to

vice.
I have not said all this to justify myself....
But, no!
I am

lying.
I did want to justify myself.
I make that little observation for

my own benefit, gentlemen.
I don’t want to lie.
I vowed to myself I

would not.
And so, furtively, timidly, in solitude, at night, I indulged in filthy

vice, with a feeling of shame which never deserted me, even at the most

loathsome moments, and which at such moments nearly made me curse.
Already even then I had my underground world in my soul.
I was

fearfully afraid of being seen, of being met, of being recognised.
I

visited various obscure haunts.
One night as I was passing a tavern I saw through a lighted window some

gentlemen fighting with billiard cues, and saw one of them thrown out

of the window.
At other times I should have felt very much disgusted,

but I was in such a mood at the time, that I actually envied the

gentleman thrown out of the window—and I envied him so much that I even

went into the tavern and into the billiard-room.
“Perhaps,” I thought,

“I’ll have a fight, too, and they’ll throw me out of the window.”



I was not drunk—but what is one to do—depression will drive a man to

such a pitch of hysteria?
But nothing happened.
It seemed that I was

not even equal to being thrown out of the window and I went away

without having my fight.
An officer put me in my place from the first moment.
I was standing by the billiard-table and in my ignorance blocking up

the way, and he wanted to pass; he took me by the shoulders and without

a word—without a warning or explanation—moved me from where I was

standing to another spot and passed by as though he had not noticed me.
I could have forgiven blows, but I could not forgive his having moved

me without noticing me.
Devil knows what I would have given for a real regular quarrel—a more

decent, a more _literary_ one, so to speak.
I had been treated like a

fly.
This officer was over six foot, while I was a spindly little

fellow.
But the quarrel was in my hands.
I had only to protest and I

certainly would have been thrown out of the window.
But I changed my

mind and preferred to beat a resentful retreat.
I went out of the tavern straight home, confused and troubled, and the

next night I went out again with the same lewd intentions, still more

furtively, abjectly and miserably than before, as it were, with tears

in my eyes—but still I did go out again.
Don’t imagine, though, it was

cowardice made me slink away from the officer; I never have been a

coward at heart, though I have always been a coward in action.
Don’t be

in a hurry to laugh—I assure you I can explain it all.
Oh, if only that officer had been one of the sort who would consent to

fight a duel!
But no, he was one of those gentlemen (alas, long

extinct!)
who preferred fighting with cues or, like Gogol’s Lieutenant

Pirogov, appealing to the police.
They did not fight duels and would

have thought a duel with a civilian like me an utterly unseemly

procedure in any case—and they looked upon the duel altogether as

something impossible, something free-thinking and French.
But they were

quite ready to bully, especially when they were over six foot.
I did not slink away through cowardice, but through an unbounded

vanity.
I was afraid not of his six foot, not of getting a sound

thrashing and being thrown out of the window; I should have had

physical courage enough, I assure you; but I had not the moral courage.
What I was afraid of was that everyone present, from the insolent

marker down to the lowest little stinking, pimply clerk in a greasy

collar, would jeer at me and fail to understand when I began to protest

and to address them in literary language.
For of the point of

honour—not of honour, but of the point of honour (_point

d’honneur_)—one cannot speak among us except in literary language.
You

can’t allude to the “point of honour” in ordinary language.
I was fully

convinced (the sense of reality, in spite of all my romanticism!)
that

they would all simply split their sides with laughter, and that the

officer would not simply beat me, that is, without insulting me, but

would certainly prod me in the back with his knee, kick me round the

billiard-table, and only then perhaps have pity and drop me out of the

window.
Of course, this trivial incident could not with me end in that.
I often

met that officer afterwards in the street and noticed him very

carefully.
I am not quite sure whether he recognised me, I imagine not;

I judge from certain signs.
But I—I stared at him with spite and hatred

and so it went on ... for several years!
My resentment grew even deeper

with years.
At first I began making stealthy inquiries about this

officer.
It was difficult for me to do so, for I knew no one.
But one

day I heard someone shout his surname in the street as I was following

him at a distance, as though I were tied to him—and so I learnt his

surname.
Another time I followed him to his flat, and for ten kopecks

learned from the porter where he lived, on which storey, whether he

lived alone or with others, and so on—in fact, everything one could

learn from a porter.
One morning, though I had never tried my hand with

the pen, it suddenly occurred to me to write a satire on this officer

in the form of a novel which would unmask his villainy.
I wrote the

novel with relish.
I did unmask his villainy, I even exaggerated it; at

first I so altered his surname that it could easily be recognised, but

on second thoughts I changed it, and sent the story to the

_Otetchestvenniya Zapiski_.
But at that time such attacks were not the

fashion and my story was not printed.
That was a great vexation to me.
Sometimes I was positively choked with resentment.
At last I determined

to challenge my enemy to a duel.
I composed a splendid, charming letter

to him, imploring him to apologise to me, and hinting rather plainly at

a duel in case of refusal.
The letter was so composed that if the

officer had had the least understanding of the sublime and the

beautiful he would certainly have flung himself on my neck and have

offered me his friendship.
And how fine that would have been!
How we

should have got on together!
“He could have shielded me with his higher

rank, while I could have improved his mind with my culture, and, well

... my ideas, and all sorts of things might have happened.” Only fancy,

this was two years after his insult to me, and my challenge would have

been a ridiculous anachronism, in spite of all the ingenuity of my

letter in disguising and explaining away the anachronism.
But, thank

God (to this day I thank the Almighty with tears in my eyes) I did not

send the letter to him.
Cold shivers run down my back when I think of

what might have happened if I had sent it.
And all at once I revenged myself in the simplest way, by a stroke of

genius!
A brilliant thought suddenly dawned upon me.
Sometimes on

holidays I used to stroll along the sunny side of the Nevsky about four

o’clock in the afternoon.
Though it was hardly a stroll so much as a

series of innumerable miseries, humiliations and resentments; but no

doubt that was just what I wanted.
I used to wriggle along in a most

unseemly fashion, like an eel, continually moving aside to make way for

generals, for officers of the guards and the hussars, or for ladies.
At

such minutes there used to be a convulsive twinge at my heart, and I

used to feel hot all down my back at the mere thought of the

wretchedness of my attire, of the wretchedness and abjectness of my

little scurrying figure.
This was a regular martyrdom, a continual,

intolerable humiliation at the thought, which passed into an incessant

and direct sensation, that I was a mere fly in the eyes of all this

world, a nasty, disgusting fly—more intelligent, more highly developed,

more refined in feeling than any of them, of course—but a fly that was

continually making way for everyone, insulted and injured by everyone.
Why I inflicted this torture upon myself, why I went to the Nevsky, I

don’t know.
I felt simply drawn there at every possible opportunity.
Already then I began to experience a rush of the enjoyment of which I

spoke in the first chapter.
After my affair with the officer I felt

even more drawn there than before: it was on the Nevsky that I met him

most frequently, there I could admire him.
He, too, went there chiefly

on holidays, He, too, turned out of his path for generals and persons

of high rank, and he too, wriggled between them like an eel; but

people, like me, or even better dressed than me, he simply walked over;

he made straight for them as though there was nothing but empty space

before him, and never, under any circumstances, turned aside.
I gloated

over my resentment watching him and ... always resentfully made way for

him.
It exasperated me that even in the street I could not be on an

even footing with him.
“Why must you invariably be the first to move aside?” I kept asking

myself in hysterical rage, waking up sometimes at three o’clock in the

morning.
“Why is it you and not he?
There’s no regulation about it;

there’s no written law.
Let the making way be equal as it usually is

when refined people meet; he moves half-way and you move half-way; you

pass with mutual respect.”



But that never happened, and I always moved aside, while he did not

even notice my making way for him.
And lo and behold a bright idea

dawned upon me!
“What,” I thought, “if I meet him and don’t move on one

side?
What if I don’t move aside on purpose, even if I knock up against

him?
How would that be?” This audacious idea took such a hold on me

that it gave me no peace.
I was dreaming of it continually, horribly,

and I purposely went more frequently to the Nevsky in order to picture

more vividly how I should do it when I did do it.
I was delighted.
This

intention seemed to me more and more practical and possible.
“Of course I shall not really push him,” I thought, already more

good-natured in my joy.
“I will simply not turn aside, will run up

against him, not very violently, but just shouldering each other—just

as much as decency permits.
I will push against him just as much as he

pushes against me.” At last I made up my mind completely.
But my

preparations took a great deal of time.
To begin with, when I carried

out my plan I should need to be looking rather more decent, and so I

had to think of my get-up.
“In case of emergency, if, for instance,

there were any sort of public scandal (and the public there is of the

most _recherché:_ the Countess walks there; Prince D. walks there; all

the literary world is there), I must be well dressed; that inspires

respect and of itself puts us on an equal footing in the eyes of the

society.”



With this object I asked for some of my salary in advance, and bought

at Tchurkin’s a pair of black gloves and a decent hat.
Black gloves

seemed to me both more dignified and _bon ton_ than the lemon-coloured

ones which I had contemplated at first.
“The colour is too gaudy, it

looks as though one were trying to be conspicuous,” and I did not take

the lemon-coloured ones.
I had got ready long beforehand a good shirt,

with white bone studs; my overcoat was the only thing that held me

back.
The coat in itself was a very good one, it kept me warm; but it

was wadded and it had a raccoon collar which was the height of

vulgarity.
I had to change the collar at any sacrifice, and to have a

beaver one like an officer’s.
For this purpose I began visiting the

Gostiny Dvor and after several attempts I pitched upon a piece of cheap

German beaver.
Though these German beavers soon grow shabby and look

wretched, yet at first they look exceedingly well, and I only needed it

for the occasion.
I asked the price; even so, it was too expensive.
After thinking it over thoroughly I decided to sell my raccoon collar.
The rest of the money—a considerable sum for me, I decided to borrow

from Anton Antonitch Syetotchkin, my immediate superior, an unassuming

person, though grave and judicious.
He never lent money to anyone, but

I had, on entering the service, been specially recommended to him by an

important personage who had got me my berth.
I was horribly worried.
To

borrow from Anton Antonitch seemed to me monstrous and shameful.
I did

not sleep for two or three nights.
Indeed, I did not sleep well at that

time, I was in a fever; I had a vague sinking at my heart or else a

sudden throbbing, throbbing, throbbing!
Anton Antonitch was surprised

at first, then he frowned, then he reflected, and did after all lend me

the money, receiving from me a written authorisation to take from my

salary a fortnight later the sum that he had lent me.
In this way everything was at last ready.
The handsome beaver replaced

the mean-looking raccoon, and I began by degrees to get to work.
It

would never have done to act offhand, at random; the plan had to be

carried out skilfully, by degrees.
But I must confess that after many

efforts I began to despair: we simply could not run into each other.
I

made every preparation, I was quite determined—it seemed as though we

should run into one another directly—and before I knew what I was doing

I had stepped aside for him again and he had passed without noticing

me.
I even prayed as I approached him that God would grant me

determination.
One time I had made up my mind thoroughly, but it ended

in my stumbling and falling at his feet because at the very last

instant when I was six inches from him my courage failed me.
He very

calmly stepped over me, while I flew on one side like a ball.
That

night I was ill again, feverish and delirious.
And suddenly it ended most happily.
The night before I had made up my

mind not to carry out my fatal plan and to abandon it all, and with

that object I went to the Nevsky for the last time, just to see how I

would abandon it all.
Suddenly, three paces from my enemy, I

unexpectedly made up my mind—I closed my eyes, and we ran full tilt,

shoulder to shoulder, against one another!
I did not budge an inch and

passed him on a perfectly equal footing!
He did not even look round and

pretended not to notice it; but he was only pretending, I am convinced

of that.
I am convinced of that to this day!
Of course, I got the worst

of it—he was stronger, but that was not the point.
The point was that I

had attained my object, I had kept up my dignity, I had not yielded a

step, and had put myself publicly on an equal social footing with him.
I returned home feeling that I was fully avenged for everything.
I was

delighted.
I was triumphant and sang Italian arias.
Of course, I will

not describe to you what happened to me three days later; if you have

read my first chapter you can guess for yourself.
The officer was

afterwards transferred; I have not seen him now for fourteen years.
What is the dear fellow doing now?
Whom is he walking over?
II





But the period of my dissipation would end and I always felt very sick

afterwards.
It was followed by remorse—I tried to drive it away; I felt

too sick.
By degrees, however, I grew used to that too.
I grew used to

everything, or rather I voluntarily resigned myself to enduring it.
But

I had a means of escape that reconciled everything—that was to find

refuge in “the sublime and the beautiful,” in dreams, of course.
I was

a terrible dreamer, I would dream for three months on end, tucked away

in my corner, and you may believe me that at those moments I had no

resemblance to the gentleman who, in the perturbation of his chicken

heart, put a collar of German beaver on his great-coat.
I suddenly

became a hero.
I would not have admitted my six-foot lieutenant even if

he had called on me.
I could not even picture him before me then.
What

were my dreams and how I could satisfy myself with them—it is hard to

say now, but at the time I was satisfied with them.
Though, indeed,

even now, I am to some extent satisfied with them.
Dreams were

particularly sweet and vivid after a spell of dissipation; they came

with remorse and with tears, with curses and transports.
There were

moments of such positive intoxication, of such happiness, that there

was not the faintest trace of irony within me, on my honour.
I had

faith, hope, love.
I believed blindly at such times that by some

miracle, by some external circumstance, all this would suddenly open

out, expand; that suddenly a vista of suitable activity—beneficent,

good, and, above all, _ready made_ (what sort of activity I had no

idea, but the great thing was that it should be all ready for me)—would

rise up before me—and I should come out into the light of day, almost

riding a white horse and crowned with laurel.
Anything but the foremost

place I could not conceive for myself, and for that very reason I quite

contentedly occupied the lowest in reality.
Either to be a hero or to

grovel in the mud—there was nothing between.
That was my ruin, for when

I was in the mud I comforted myself with the thought that at other

times I was a hero, and the hero was a cloak for the mud: for an

ordinary man it was shameful to defile himself, but a hero was too

lofty to be utterly defiled, and so he might defile himself.
It is

worth noting that these attacks of the “sublime and the beautiful”

visited me even during the period of dissipation and just at the times

when I was touching the bottom.
They came in separate spurts, as though

reminding me of themselves, but did not banish the dissipation by their

appearance.
On the contrary, they seemed to add a zest to it by

contrast, and were only sufficiently present to serve as an appetising

sauce.
That sauce was made up of contradictions and sufferings, of

agonising inward analysis, and all these pangs and pin-pricks gave a

certain piquancy, even a significance to my dissipation—in fact,

completely answered the purpose of an appetising sauce.
There was a

certain depth of meaning in it.
And I could hardly have resigned myself

to the simple, vulgar, direct debauchery of a clerk and have endured

all the filthiness of it.
What could have allured me about it then and

have drawn me at night into the street?
No, I had a lofty way of

getting out of it all.
And what loving-kindness, oh Lord, what loving-kindness I felt at times

in those dreams of mine!
in those “flights into the sublime and the

beautiful”; though it was fantastic love, though it was never applied

to anything human in reality, yet there was so much of this love that

one did not feel afterwards even the impulse to apply it in reality;

that would have been superfluous.
Everything, however, passed

satisfactorily by a lazy and fascinating transition into the sphere of

art, that is, into the beautiful forms of life, lying ready, largely

stolen from the poets and novelists and adapted to all sorts of needs

and uses.
I, for instance, was triumphant over everyone; everyone, of

course, was in dust and ashes, and was forced spontaneously to

recognise my superiority, and I forgave them all.
I was a poet and a

grand gentleman, I fell in love; I came in for countless millions and

immediately devoted them to humanity, and at the same time I confessed

before all the people my shameful deeds, which, of course, were not

merely shameful, but had in them much that was “sublime and beautiful”

something in the Manfred style.
Everyone would kiss me and weep (what

idiots they would be if they did not), while I should go barefoot and

hungry preaching new ideas and fighting a victorious Austerlitz against

the obscurantists.
Then the band would play a march, an amnesty would

be declared, the Pope would agree to retire from Rome to Brazil; then

there would be a ball for the whole of Italy at the Villa Borghese on

the shores of Lake Como, Lake Como being for that purpose transferred

to the neighbourhood of Rome; then would come a scene in the bushes,

and so on, and so on—as though you did not know all about it?
You will

say that it is vulgar and contemptible to drag all this into public

after all the tears and transports which I have myself confessed.
But

why is it contemptible?
Can you imagine that I am ashamed of it all,

and that it was stupider than anything in your life, gentlemen?
And I

can assure you that some of these fancies were by no means badly

composed....
It did not all happen on the shores of Lake Como.
And yet

you are right—it really is vulgar and contemptible.
And most

contemptible of all it is that now I am attempting to justify myself to

you.
And even more contemptible than that is my making this remark now.
But that’s enough, or there will be no end to it; each step will be

more contemptible than the last....
I could never stand more than three months of dreaming at a time

without feeling an irresistible desire to plunge into society.
To

plunge into society meant to visit my superior at the office, Anton

Antonitch Syetotchkin.
He was the only permanent acquaintance I have

had in my life, and I wonder at the fact myself now.
But I only went to

see him when that phase came over me, and when my dreams had reached

such a point of bliss that it became essential at once to embrace my

fellows and all mankind; and for that purpose I needed, at least, one

human being, actually existing.
I had to call on Anton Antonitch,

however, on Tuesday—his at-home day; so I had always to time my

passionate desire to embrace humanity so that it might fall on a

Tuesday.
This Anton Antonitch lived on the fourth storey in a house in Five

Corners, in four low-pitched rooms, one smaller than the other, of a

particularly frugal and sallow appearance.
He had two daughters and

their aunt, who used to pour out the tea.
Of the daughters one was

thirteen and another fourteen, they both had snub noses, and I was

awfully shy of them because they were always whispering and giggling

together.
The master of the house usually sat in his study on a leather

couch in front of the table with some grey-headed gentleman, usually a

colleague from our office or some other department.
I never saw more

than two or three visitors there, always the same.
They talked about

the excise duty; about business in the senate, about salaries, about

promotions, about His Excellency, and the best means of pleasing him,

and so on.
I had the patience to sit like a fool beside these people

for four hours at a stretch, listening to them without knowing what to

say to them or venturing to say a word.
I became stupefied, several

times I felt myself perspiring, I was overcome by a sort of paralysis;

but this was pleasant and good for me.
On returning home I deferred for

a time my desire to embrace all mankind.
I had however one other acquaintance of a sort, Simonov, who was an old

schoolfellow.
I had a number of schoolfellows, indeed, in Petersburg,

but I did not associate with them and had even given up nodding to them

in the street.
I believe I had transferred into the department I was in

simply to avoid their company and to cut off all connection with my

hateful childhood.
Curses on that school and all those terrible years

of penal servitude!
In short, I parted from my schoolfellows as soon as

I got out into the world.
There were two or three left to whom I nodded

in the street.
One of them was Simonov, who had in no way been

distinguished at school, was of a quiet and equable disposition; but I

discovered in him a certain independence of character and even honesty

I don’t even suppose that he was particularly stupid.
I had at one time

spent some rather soulful moments with him, but these had not lasted

long and had somehow been suddenly clouded over.
He was evidently

uncomfortable at these reminiscences, and was, I fancy, always afraid

that I might take up the same tone again.
I suspected that he had an

aversion for me, but still I went on going to see him, not being quite

certain of it.
And so on one occasion, unable to endure my solitude and knowing that

as it was Thursday Anton Antonitch’s door would be closed, I thought of

Simonov.
Climbing up to his fourth storey I was thinking that the man

disliked me and that it was a mistake to go and see him.
But as it

always happened that such reflections impelled me, as though purposely,

to put myself into a false position, I went in.
It was almost a year

since I had last seen Simonov.
III





I found two of my old schoolfellows with him.
They seemed to be

discussing an important matter.
All of them took scarcely any notice of

my entrance, which was strange, for I had not met them for years.
Evidently they looked upon me as something on the level of a common

fly.
I had not been treated like that even at school, though they all

hated me.
I knew, of course, that they must despise me now for my lack

of success in the service, and for my having let myself sink so low,

going about badly dressed and so on—which seemed to them a sign of my

incapacity and insignificance.
But I had not expected such contempt.
Simonov was positively surprised at my turning up.
Even in old days he

had always seemed surprised at my coming.
All this disconcerted me: I

sat down, feeling rather miserable, and began listening to what they

were saying.
They were engaged in warm and earnest conversation about a farewell

dinner which they wanted to arrange for the next day to a comrade of

theirs called Zverkov, an officer in the army, who was going away to a

distant province.
This Zverkov had been all the time at school with me

too.
I had begun to hate him particularly in the upper forms.
In the

lower forms he had simply been a pretty, playful boy whom everybody

liked.
I had hated him, however, even in the lower forms, just because

he was a pretty and playful boy.
He was always bad at his lessons and

got worse and worse as he went on; however, he left with a good

certificate, as he had powerful interests.
During his last year at

school he came in for an estate of two hundred serfs, and as almost all

of us were poor he took up a swaggering tone among us.
He was vulgar in

the extreme, but at the same time he was a good-natured fellow, even in

his swaggering.
In spite of superficial, fantastic and sham notions of

honour and dignity, all but very few of us positively grovelled before

Zverkov, and the more so the more he swaggered.
And it was not from any

interested motive that they grovelled, but simply because he had been

favoured by the gifts of nature.
Moreover, it was, as it were, an

accepted idea among us that Zverkov was a specialist in regard to tact

and the social graces.
This last fact particularly infuriated me.
I

hated the abrupt self-confident tone of his voice, his admiration of

his own witticisms, which were often frightfully stupid, though he was

bold in his language; I hated his handsome, but stupid face (for which

I would, however, have gladly exchanged my intelligent one), and the

free-and-easy military manners in fashion in the “’forties.” I hated

the way in which he used to talk of his future conquests of women (he

did not venture to begin his attack upon women until he had the

epaulettes of an officer, and was looking forward to them with

impatience), and boasted of the duels he would constantly be fighting.
I remember how I, invariably so taciturn, suddenly fastened upon

Zverkov, when one day talking at a leisure moment with his

schoolfellows of his future relations with the fair sex, and growing as

sportive as a puppy in the sun, he all at once declared that he would

not leave a single village girl on his estate unnoticed, that that was

his _droit de seigneur_, and that if the peasants dared to protest he

would have them all flogged and double the tax on them, the bearded

rascals.
Our servile rabble applauded, but I attacked him, not from

compassion for the girls and their fathers, but simply because they

were applauding such an insect.
I got the better of him on that

occasion, but though Zverkov was stupid he was lively and impudent, and

so laughed it off, and in such a way that my victory was not really

complete; the laugh was on his side.
He got the better of me on several

occasions afterwards, but without malice, jestingly, casually.
I

remained angrily and contemptuously silent and would not answer him.
When we left school he made advances to me; I did not rebuff them, for

I was flattered, but we soon parted and quite naturally.
Afterwards I

heard of his barrack-room success as a lieutenant, and of the fast life

he was leading.
Then there came other rumours—of his successes in the

service.
By then he had taken to cutting me in the street, and I

suspected that he was afraid of compromising himself by greeting a

personage as insignificant as me.
I saw him once in the theatre, in the

third tier of boxes.
By then he was wearing shoulder-straps.
He was

twisting and twirling about, ingratiating himself with the daughters of

an ancient General.
In three years he had gone off considerably, though

he was still rather handsome and adroit.
One could see that by the time

he was thirty he would be corpulent.
So it was to this Zverkov that my

schoolfellows were going to give a dinner on his departure.
They had

kept up with him for those three years, though privately they did not

consider themselves on an equal footing with him, I am convinced of

that.
Of Simonov’s two visitors, one was Ferfitchkin, a Russianised German—a

little fellow with the face of a monkey, a blockhead who was always

deriding everyone, a very bitter enemy of mine from our days in the

lower forms—a vulgar, impudent, swaggering fellow, who affected a most

sensitive feeling of personal honour, though, of course, he was a

wretched little coward at heart.
He was one of those worshippers of

Zverkov who made up to the latter from interested motives, and often

borrowed money from him.
Simonov’s other visitor, Trudolyubov, was a

person in no way remarkable—a tall young fellow, in the army, with a

cold face, fairly honest, though he worshipped success of every sort,

and was only capable of thinking of promotion.
He was some sort of

distant relation of Zverkov’s, and this, foolish as it seems, gave him

a certain importance among us.
He always thought me of no consequence

whatever; his behaviour to me, though not quite courteous, was

tolerable.
“Well, with seven roubles each,” said Trudolyubov, “twenty-one roubles

between the three of us, we ought to be able to get a good dinner.
Zverkov, of course, won’t pay.”



“Of course not, since we are inviting him,” Simonov decided.
“Can you imagine,” Ferfitchkin interrupted hotly and conceitedly, like

some insolent flunkey boasting of his master the General’s decorations,

“can you imagine that Zverkov will let us pay alone?
He will accept

from delicacy, but he will order half a dozen bottles of champagne.”



“Do we want half a dozen for the four of us?” observed Trudolyubov,

taking notice only of the half dozen.
“So the three of us, with Zverkov for the fourth, twenty-one roubles,

at the Hôtel de Paris at five o’clock tomorrow,” Simonov, who had been

asked to make the arrangements, concluded finally.
“How twenty-one roubles?” I asked in some agitation, with a show of

being offended; “if you count me it will not be twenty-one, but

twenty-eight roubles.”



It seemed to me that to invite myself so suddenly and unexpectedly

would be positively graceful, and that they would all be conquered at

once and would look at me with respect.
“Do you want to join, too?” Simonov observed, with no appearance of

pleasure, seeming to avoid looking at me.
He knew me through and

through.
It infuriated me that he knew me so thoroughly.
“Why not?
I am an old schoolfellow of his, too, I believe, and I must

own I feel hurt that you have left me out,” I said, boiling over again.
“And where were we to find you?” Ferfitchkin put in roughly.
“You never were on good terms with Zverkov,” Trudolyubov added,

frowning.
But I had already clutched at the idea and would not give it up.
“It seems to me that no one has a right to form an opinion upon that,”

I retorted in a shaking voice, as though something tremendous had

happened.
“Perhaps that is just my reason for wishing it now, that I

have not always been on good terms with him.”



“Oh, there’s no making you out ... with these refinements,” Trudolyubov

jeered.
“We’ll put your name down,” Simonov decided, addressing me.
“Tomorrow

at five-o’clock at the Hôtel de Paris.”



“What about the money?” Ferfitchkin began in an undertone, indicating

me to Simonov, but he broke off, for even Simonov was embarrassed.
“That will do,” said Trudolyubov, getting up.
“If he wants to come so

much, let him.”



“But it’s a private thing, between us friends,” Ferfitchkin said

crossly, as he, too, picked up his hat.
“It’s not an official

gathering.”



“We do not want at all, perhaps ...”



They went away.
Ferfitchkin did not greet me in any way as he went out,

Trudolyubov barely nodded.
Simonov, with whom I was left _tête-à-tête_,

was in a state of vexation and perplexity, and looked at me queerly.
He

did not sit down and did not ask me to.
“H’m ... yes ... tomorrow, then.
Will you pay your subscription now?
I

just ask so as to know,” he muttered in embarrassment.
I flushed crimson, as I did so I remembered that I had owed Simonov

fifteen roubles for ages—which I had, indeed, never forgotten, though I

had not paid it.
“You will understand, Simonov, that I could have no idea when I came

here....
I am very much vexed that I have forgotten....”



“All right, all right, that doesn’t matter.
You can pay tomorrow after

the dinner.
I simply wanted to know....
Please don’t...”



He broke off and began pacing the room still more vexed.
As he walked

he began to stamp with his heels.
“Am I keeping you?” I asked, after two minutes of silence.
“Oh!” he said, starting, “that is—to be truthful—yes.
I have to go and

see someone ... not far from here,” he added in an apologetic voice,

somewhat abashed.
“My goodness, why didn’t you say so?” I cried, seizing my cap, with an

astonishingly free-and-easy air, which was the last thing I should have

expected of myself.
“It’s close by ... not two paces away,” Simonov repeated, accompanying

me to the front door with a fussy air which did not suit him at all.
“So five o’clock, punctually, tomorrow,” he called down the stairs

after me.
He was very glad to get rid of me.
I was in a fury.
“What possessed me, what possessed me to force myself upon them?” I

wondered, grinding my teeth as I strode along the street, “for a

scoundrel, a pig like that Zverkov!
Of course I had better not go; of

course, I must just snap my fingers at them.
I am not bound in any way.
I’ll send Simonov a note by tomorrow’s post....”



But what made me furious was that I knew for certain that I should go,

that I should make a point of going; and the more tactless, the more

unseemly my going would be, the more certainly I would go.
And there was a positive obstacle to my going: I had no money.
All I

had was nine roubles, I had to give seven of that to my servant,

Apollon, for his monthly wages.
That was all I paid him—he had to keep

himself.
Not to pay him was impossible, considering his character.
But I will

talk about that fellow, about that plague of mine, another time.
However, I knew I should go and should not pay him his wages.
That night I had the most hideous dreams.
No wonder; all the evening I

had been oppressed by memories of my miserable days at school, and I

could not shake them off.
I was sent to the school by distant

relations, upon whom I was dependent and of whom I have heard nothing

since—they sent me there a forlorn, silent boy, already crushed by

their reproaches, already troubled by doubt, and looking with savage

distrust at everyone.
My schoolfellows met me with spiteful and

merciless jibes because I was not like any of them.
But I could not

endure their taunts; I could not give in to them with the ignoble

readiness with which they gave in to one another.
I hated them from the

first, and shut myself away from everyone in timid, wounded and

disproportionate pride.
Their coarseness revolted me.
They laughed

cynically at my face, at my clumsy figure; and yet what stupid faces

they had themselves.
In our school the boys’ faces seemed in a special

way to degenerate and grow stupider.
How many fine-looking boys came to

us!
In a few years they became repulsive.
Even at sixteen I wondered at

them morosely; even then I was struck by the pettiness of their

thoughts, the stupidity of their pursuits, their games, their

conversations.
They had no understanding of such essential things, they

took no interest in such striking, impressive subjects, that I could

not help considering them inferior to myself.
It was not wounded vanity

that drove me to it, and for God’s sake do not thrust upon me your

hackneyed remarks, repeated to nausea, that “I was only a dreamer,”

while they even then had an understanding of life.
They understood

nothing, they had no idea of real life, and I swear that that was what

made me most indignant with them.
On the contrary, the most obvious,

striking reality they accepted with fantastic stupidity and even at

that time were accustomed to respect success.
Everything that was just,

but oppressed and looked down upon, they laughed at heartlessly and

shamefully.
They took rank for intelligence; even at sixteen they were

already talking about a snug berth.
Of course, a great deal of it was

due to their stupidity, to the bad examples with which they had always

been surrounded in their childhood and boyhood.
They were monstrously

depraved.
Of course a great deal of that, too, was superficial and an

assumption of cynicism; of course there were glimpses of youth and

freshness even in their depravity; but even that freshness was not

attractive, and showed itself in a certain rakishness.
I hated them

horribly, though perhaps I was worse than any of them.
They repaid me

in the same way, and did not conceal their aversion for me.
But by then

I did not desire their affection: on the contrary, I continually longed

for their humiliation.
To escape from their derision I purposely began

to make all the progress I could with my studies and forced my way to

the very top.
This impressed them.
Moreover, they all began by degrees

to grasp that I had already read books none of them could read, and

understood things (not forming part of our school curriculum) of which

they had not even heard.
They took a savage and sarcastic view of it,

but were morally impressed, especially as the teachers began to notice

me on those grounds.
The mockery ceased, but the hostility remained,

and cold and strained relations became permanent between us.
In the end

I could not put up with it: with years a craving for society, for

friends, developed in me.
I attempted to get on friendly terms with

some of my schoolfellows; but somehow or other my intimacy with them

was always strained and soon ended of itself.
Once, indeed, I did have

a friend.
But I was already a tyrant at heart; I wanted to exercise

unbounded sway over him; I tried to instil into him a contempt for his

surroundings; I required of him a disdainful and complete break with

those surroundings.
I frightened him with my passionate affection; I

reduced him to tears, to hysterics.
He was a simple and devoted soul;

but when he devoted himself to me entirely I began to hate him

immediately and repulsed him—as though all I needed him for was to win

a victory over him, to subjugate him and nothing else.
But I could not

subjugate all of them; my friend was not at all like them either, he

was, in fact, a rare exception.
The first thing I did on leaving school

was to give up the special job for which I had been destined so as to

break all ties, to curse my past and shake the dust from off my

feet.... And goodness knows why, after all that, I should go trudging

off to Simonov’s!
Early next morning I roused myself and jumped out of bed with

excitement, as though it were all about to happen at once.
But I

believed that some radical change in my life was coming, and would

inevitably come that day.
Owing to its rarity, perhaps, any external

event, however trivial, always made me feel as though some radical

change in my life were at hand.
I went to the office, however, as

usual, but sneaked away home two hours earlier to get ready.
The great

thing, I thought, is not to be the first to arrive, or they will think

I am overjoyed at coming.
But there were thousands of such great points

to consider, and they all agitated and overwhelmed me.
I polished my

boots a second time with my own hands; nothing in the world would have

induced Apollon to clean them twice a day, as he considered that it was

more than his duties required of him.
I stole the brushes to clean them

from the passage, being careful he should not detect it, for fear of

his contempt.
Then I minutely examined my clothes and thought that

everything looked old, worn and threadbare.
I had let myself get too

slovenly.
My uniform, perhaps, was tidy, but I could not go out to

dinner in my uniform.
The worst of it was that on the knee of my

trousers was a big yellow stain.
I had a foreboding that that stain

would deprive me of nine-tenths of my personal dignity.
I knew, too,

that it was very poor to think so.
“But this is no time for thinking:

now I am in for the real thing,” I thought, and my heart sank.
I knew,

too, perfectly well even then, that I was monstrously exaggerating the

facts.
But how could I help it?
I could not control myself and was

already shaking with fever.
With despair I pictured to myself how

coldly and disdainfully that “scoundrel” Zverkov would meet me; with

what dull-witted, invincible contempt the blockhead Trudolyubov would

look at me; with what impudent rudeness the insect Ferfitchkin would

snigger at me in order to curry favour with Zverkov; how completely

Simonov would take it all in, and how he would despise me for the

abjectness of my vanity and lack of spirit—and, worst of all, how

paltry, _unliterary_, commonplace it would all be.
Of course, the best

thing would be not to go at all.
But that was most impossible of all:

if I feel impelled to do anything, I seem to be pitchforked into it.
I

should have jeered at myself ever afterwards: “So you funked it, you

funked it, you funked the _real thing!_” On the contrary, I

passionately longed to show all that “rabble” that I was by no means

such a spiritless creature as I seemed to myself.
What is more, even in

the acutest paroxysm of this cowardly fever, I dreamed of getting the

upper hand, of dominating them, carrying them away, making them like

me—if only for my “elevation of thought and unmistakable wit.” They

would abandon Zverkov, he would sit on one side, silent and ashamed,

while I should crush him.
Then, perhaps, we would be reconciled and

drink to our everlasting friendship; but what was most bitter and

humiliating for me was that I knew even then, knew fully and for

certain, that I needed nothing of all this really, that I did not

really want to crush, to subdue, to attract them, and that I did not

care a straw really for the result, even if I did achieve it.
Oh, how I

prayed for the day to pass quickly!
In unutterable anguish I went to

the window, opened the movable pane and looked out into the troubled

darkness of the thickly falling wet snow.
At last my wretched little

clock hissed out five.
I seized my hat and, trying not to look at

Apollon, who had been all day expecting his month’s wages, but in his

foolishness was unwilling to be the first to speak about it, I slipped

between him and the door and, jumping into a high-class sledge, on

which I spent my last half rouble, I drove up in grand style to the

Hôtel de Paris.
IV





I had been certain the day before that I should be the first to arrive.
But it was not a question of being the first to arrive.
Not only were

they not there, but I had difficulty in finding our room.
The table was

not laid even.
What did it mean?
After a good many questions I elicited

from the waiters that the dinner had been ordered not for five, but for

six o’clock.
This was confirmed at the buffet too.
I felt really

ashamed to go on questioning them.
It was only twenty-five minutes past

five.
If they changed the dinner hour they ought at least to have let

me know—that is what the post is for, and not to have put me in an

absurd position in my own eyes and ... and even before the waiters.
I

sat down; the servant began laying the table; I felt even more

humiliated when he was present.
Towards six o’clock they brought in

candles, though there were lamps burning in the room.
It had not

occurred to the waiter, however, to bring them in at once when I

arrived.
In the next room two gloomy, angry-looking persons were eating

their dinners in silence at two different tables.
There was a great

deal of noise, even shouting, in a room further away; one could hear

the laughter of a crowd of people, and nasty little shrieks in French:

there were ladies at the dinner.
It was sickening, in fact.
I rarely

passed more unpleasant moments, so much so that when they did arrive

all together punctually at six I was overjoyed to see them, as though

they were my deliverers, and even forgot that it was incumbent upon me

to show resentment.
Zverkov walked in at the head of them; evidently he was the leading

spirit.
He and all of them were laughing; but, seeing me, Zverkov drew

himself up a little, walked up to me deliberately with a slight, rather

jaunty bend from the waist.
He shook hands with me in a friendly, but

not over-friendly, fashion, with a sort of circumspect courtesy like

that of a General, as though in giving me his hand he were warding off

something.
I had imagined, on the contrary, that on coming in he would

at once break into his habitual thin, shrill laugh and fall to making

his insipid jokes and witticisms.
I had been preparing for them ever

since the previous day, but I had not expected such condescension, such

high-official courtesy.
So, then, he felt himself ineffably superior to

me in every respect!
If he only meant to insult me by that

high-official tone, it would not matter, I thought—I could pay him back

for it one way or another.
But what if, in reality, without the least

desire to be offensive, that sheepshead had a notion in earnest that he

was superior to me and could only look at me in a patronising way?
The

very supposition made me gasp.
“I was surprised to hear of your desire to join us,” he began, lisping

and drawling, which was something new.
“You and I seem to have seen

nothing of one another.
You fight shy of us.
You shouldn’t.
We are not

such terrible people as you think.
Well, anyway, I am glad to renew our

acquaintance.”



And he turned carelessly to put down his hat on the window.
“Have you been waiting long?” Trudolyubov inquired.
“I arrived at five o’clock as you told me yesterday,” I answered aloud,

with an irritability that threatened an explosion.
“Didn’t you let him know that we had changed the hour?” said

Trudolyubov to Simonov.
“No, I didn’t.
I forgot,” the latter replied, with no sign of regret,

and without even apologising to me he went off to order the _hors

d’œuvres_.
“So you’ve been here a whole hour?
Oh, poor fellow!” Zverkov cried

ironically, for to his notions this was bound to be extremely funny.
That rascal Ferfitchkin followed with his nasty little snigger like a

puppy yapping.
My position struck him, too, as exquisitely ludicrous

and embarrassing.
“It isn’t funny at all!” I cried to Ferfitchkin, more and more

irritated.
“It wasn’t my fault, but other people’s.
They neglected to

let me know.
It was ... it was ... it was simply absurd.”



“It’s not only absurd, but something else as well,” muttered

Trudolyubov, naively taking my part.
“You are not hard enough upon it.
It was simply rudeness—unintentional, of course.
And how could Simonov

... h’m!”



“If a trick like that had been played on me,” observed Ferfitchkin, “I

should ...”



“But you should have ordered something for yourself,” Zverkov

interrupted, “or simply asked for dinner without waiting for us.”



“You will allow that I might have done that without your permission,” I

rapped out.
“If I waited, it was ...”



“Let us sit down, gentlemen,” cried Simonov, coming in.
“Everything is

ready; I can answer for the champagne; it is capitally frozen.... You

see, I did not know your address, where was I to look for you?” he

suddenly turned to me, but again he seemed to avoid looking at me.
Evidently he had something against me.
It must have been what happened

yesterday.
All sat down; I did the same.
It was a round table.
Trudolyubov was on

my left, Simonov on my right, Zverkov was sitting opposite, Ferfitchkin

next to him, between him and Trudolyubov.
“Tell me, are you ... in a government office?” Zverkov went on

attending to me.
Seeing that I was embarrassed he seriously thought

that he ought to be friendly to me, and, so to speak, cheer me up.
“Does he want me to throw a bottle at his head?” I thought, in a fury.
In my novel surroundings I was unnaturally ready to be irritated.
“In the N—— office,” I answered jerkily, with my eyes on my plate.
“And ha-ave you a go-od berth?
I say, what ma-a-de you leave your

original job?”



“What ma-a-de me was that I wanted to leave my original job,” I drawled

more than he, hardly able to control myself.
Ferfitchkin went off into

a guffaw.
Simonov looked at me ironically.
Trudolyubov left off eating

and began looking at me with curiosity.
Zverkov winced, but he tried not to notice it.
“And the remuneration?”



“What remuneration?”



“I mean, your sa-a-lary?”



“Why are you cross-examining me?” However, I told him at once what my

salary was.
I turned horribly red.
“It is not very handsome,” Zverkov observed majestically.
“Yes, you can’t afford to dine at cafés on that,” Ferfitchkin added

insolently.
“To my thinking it’s very poor,” Trudolyubov observed gravely.
“And how thin you have grown!
How you have changed!” added Zverkov,

with a shade of venom in his voice, scanning me and my attire with a

sort of insolent compassion.
“Oh, spare his blushes,” cried Ferfitchkin, sniggering.
“My dear sir, allow me to tell you I am not blushing,” I broke out at

last; “do you hear?
I am dining here, at this cafe, at my own expense,

not at other people’s—note that, Mr. Ferfitchkin.”



“Wha-at?
Isn’t every one here dining at his own expense?
You would seem

to be ...” Ferfitchkin flew out at me, turning as red as a lobster, and

looking me in the face with fury.
“Tha-at,” I answered, feeling I had gone too far, “and I imagine it

would be better to talk of something more intelligent.”



“You intend to show off your intelligence, I suppose?”



“Don’t disturb yourself, that would be quite out of place here.”



“Why are you clacking away like that, my good sir, eh?
Have you gone

out of your wits in your office?”



“Enough, gentlemen, enough!” Zverkov cried, authoritatively.
“How stupid it is!” muttered Simonov.
“It really is stupid.
We have met here, a company of friends, for a

farewell dinner to a comrade and you carry on an altercation,” said

Trudolyubov, rudely addressing himself to me alone.
“You invited

yourself to join us, so don’t disturb the general harmony.”



“Enough, enough!” cried Zverkov.
“Give over, gentlemen, it’s out of

place.
Better let me tell you how I nearly got married the day before

yesterday....”



And then followed a burlesque narrative of how this gentleman had

almost been married two days before.
There was not a word about the

marriage, however, but the story was adorned with generals, colonels

and kammer-junkers, while Zverkov almost took the lead among them.
It

was greeted with approving laughter; Ferfitchkin positively squealed.
No one paid any attention to me, and I sat crushed and humiliated.
“Good Heavens, these are not the people for me!” I thought.
“And what a

fool I have made of myself before them!
I let Ferfitchkin go too far,

though.
The brutes imagine they are doing me an honour in letting me

sit down with them.
They don’t understand that it’s an honour to them

and not to me!
I’ve grown thinner!
My clothes!
Oh, damn my trousers!
Zverkov noticed the yellow stain on the knee as soon as he came in....
But what’s the use!
I must get up at once, this very minute, take my

hat and simply go without a word ... with contempt!
And tomorrow I can

send a challenge.
The scoundrels!
As though I cared about the seven

roubles.
They may think....
Damn it!
I don’t care about the seven

roubles.
I’ll go this minute!”



Of course I remained.
I drank sherry and Lafitte by the glassful in my

discomfiture.
Being unaccustomed to it, I was quickly affected.
My

annoyance increased as the wine went to my head.
I longed all at once

to insult them all in a most flagrant manner and then go away.
To seize

the moment and show what I could do, so that they would say, “He’s

clever, though he is absurd,” and ... and ... in fact, damn them all!
I scanned them all insolently with my drowsy eyes.
But they seemed to

have forgotten me altogether.
They were noisy, vociferous, cheerful.
Zverkov was talking all the time.
I began listening.
Zverkov was

talking of some exuberant lady whom he had at last led on to declaring

her love (of course, he was lying like a horse), and how he had been

helped in this affair by an intimate friend of his, a Prince Kolya, an

officer in the hussars, who had three thousand serfs.
“And yet this Kolya, who has three thousand serfs, has not put in an

appearance here tonight to see you off,” I cut in suddenly.
For one minute every one was silent.
“You are drunk already.”

Trudolyubov deigned to notice me at last, glancing contemptuously in my

direction.
Zverkov, without a word, examined me as though I were an

insect.
I dropped my eyes.
Simonov made haste to fill up the glasses

with champagne.
Trudolyubov raised his glass, as did everyone else but me.
“Your health and good luck on the journey!” he cried to Zverkov.
“To

old times, to our future, hurrah!”



They all tossed off their glasses, and crowded round Zverkov to kiss

him.
I did not move; my full glass stood untouched before me.
“Why, aren’t you going to drink it?” roared Trudolyubov, losing

patience and turning menacingly to me.
“I want to make a speech separately, on my own account ... and then

I’ll drink it, Mr. Trudolyubov.”



“Spiteful brute!” muttered Simonov.
I drew myself up in my chair and

feverishly seized my glass, prepared for something extraordinary,

though I did not know myself precisely what I was going to say.
“_Silence!_” cried Ferfitchkin.
“Now for a display of wit!”



Zverkov waited very gravely, knowing what was coming.
“Mr.
Lieutenant Zverkov,” I began, “let me tell you that I hate

phrases, phrasemongers and men in corsets ... that’s the first point,

and there is a second one to follow it.”



There was a general stir.
“The second point is: I hate ribaldry and ribald talkers.
Especially

ribald talkers!
The third point: I love justice, truth and honesty.” I

went on almost mechanically, for I was beginning to shiver with horror

myself and had no idea how I came to be talking like this.
“I love

thought, Monsieur Zverkov; I love true comradeship, on an equal footing

and not ... H’m ...
I love ...
But, however, why not?
I will drink your

health, too, Mr. Zverkov.
Seduce the Circassian girls, shoot the

enemies of the fatherland and ... and ... to your health, Monsieur

Zverkov!”



Zverkov got up from his seat, bowed to me and said:



“I am very much obliged to you.” He was frightfully offended and turned

pale.
“Damn the fellow!” roared Trudolyubov, bringing his fist down on the

table.
“Well, he wants a punch in the face for that,” squealed Ferfitchkin.
“We ought to turn him out,” muttered Simonov.
“Not a word, gentlemen, not a movement!” cried Zverkov solemnly,

checking the general indignation.
“I thank you all, but I can show him

for myself how much value I attach to his words.”



“Mr.
Ferfitchkin, you will give me satisfaction tomorrow for your words

just now!” I said aloud, turning with dignity to Ferfitchkin.
“A duel, you mean?
Certainly,” he answered.
But probably I was so

ridiculous as I challenged him and it was so out of keeping with my

appearance that everyone including Ferfitchkin was prostrate with

laughter.
“Yes, let him alone, of course!
He is quite drunk,” Trudolyubov said

with disgust.
“I shall never forgive myself for letting him join us,” Simonov

muttered again.
“Now is the time to throw a bottle at their heads,” I thought to

myself.
I picked up the bottle ... and filled my glass.... “No, I’d

better sit on to the end,” I went on thinking; “you would be pleased,

my friends, if I went away.
Nothing will induce me to go.
I’ll go on

sitting here and drinking to the end, on purpose, as a sign that I

don’t think you of the slightest consequence.
I will go on sitting and

drinking, because this is a public-house and I paid my entrance money.
I’ll sit here and drink, for I look upon you as so many pawns, as

inanimate pawns.
I’ll sit here and drink ... and sing if I want to,

yes, sing, for I have the right to ... to sing ... H’m!”



But I did not sing.
I simply tried not to look at any of them.
I

assumed most unconcerned attitudes and waited with impatience for them

to speak _first_.
But alas, they did not address me!
And oh, how I

wished, how I wished at that moment to be reconciled to them!
It struck

eight, at last nine.
They moved from the table to the sofa.
Zverkov

stretched himself on a lounge and put one foot on a round table.
Wine

was brought there.
He did, as a fact, order three bottles on his own

account.
I, of course, was not invited to join them.
They all sat round

him on the sofa.
They listened to him, almost with reverence.
It was

evident that they were fond of him.
“What for?
What for?” I wondered.
From time to time they were moved to drunken enthusiasm and kissed each

other.
They talked of the Caucasus, of the nature of true passion, of

snug berths in the service, of the income of an hussar called

Podharzhevsky, whom none of them knew personally, and rejoiced in the

largeness of it, of the extraordinary grace and beauty of a Princess

D., whom none of them had ever seen; then it came to Shakespeare’s

being immortal.
I smiled contemptuously and walked up and down the other side of the

room, opposite the sofa, from the table to the stove and back again.
I

tried my very utmost to show them that I could do without them, and yet

I purposely made a noise with my boots, thumping with my heels.
But it

was all in vain.
They paid no attention.
I had the patience to walk up

and down in front of them from eight o’clock till eleven, in the same

place, from the table to the stove and back again.
“I walk up and down

to please myself and no one can prevent me.” The waiter who came into

the room stopped, from time to time, to look at me.
I was somewhat

giddy from turning round so often; at moments it seemed to me that I

was in delirium.
During those three hours I was three times soaked with

sweat and dry again.
At times, with an intense, acute pang I was

stabbed to the heart by the thought that ten years, twenty years, forty

years would pass, and that even in forty years I would remember with

loathing and humiliation those filthiest, most ludicrous, and most

awful moments of my life.
No one could have gone out of his way to

degrade himself more shamelessly, and I fully realised it, fully, and

yet I went on pacing up and down from the table to the stove.
“Oh, if

you only knew what thoughts and feelings I am capable of, how cultured

I am!” I thought at moments, mentally addressing the sofa on which my

enemies were sitting.
But my enemies behaved as though I were not in

the room.
Once—only once—they turned towards me, just when Zverkov was

talking about Shakespeare, and I suddenly gave a contemptuous laugh.
I

laughed in such an affected and disgusting way that they all at once

broke off their conversation, and silently and gravely for two minutes

watched me walking up and down from the table to the stove, _taking no

notice of them_.
But nothing came of it: they said nothing, and two

minutes later they ceased to notice me again.
It struck eleven.
“Friends,” cried Zverkov getting up from the sofa, “let us all be off

now, _there!_”



“Of course, of course,” the others assented.
I turned sharply to

Zverkov.
I was so harassed, so exhausted, that I would have cut my

throat to put an end to it.
I was in a fever; my hair, soaked with

perspiration, stuck to my forehead and temples.
“Zverkov, I beg your pardon,” I said abruptly and resolutely.
“Ferfitchkin, yours too, and everyone’s, everyone’s: I have insulted

you all!”



“Aha!
A duel is not in your line, old man,” Ferfitchkin hissed

venomously.
It sent a sharp pang to my heart.
“No, it’s not the duel I am afraid of, Ferfitchkin!
I am ready to fight

you tomorrow, after we are reconciled.
I insist upon it, in fact, and

you cannot refuse.
I want to show you that I am not afraid of a duel.
You shall fire first and I shall fire into the air.”



“He is comforting himself,” said Simonov.
“He’s simply raving,” said Trudolyubov.
“But let us pass.
Why are you barring our way?
What do you want?”

Zverkov answered disdainfully.
They were all flushed, their eyes were bright: they had been drinking

heavily.
“I ask for your friendship, Zverkov; I insulted you, but ...”



“Insulted?
_You_ insulted _me?_ Understand, sir, that you never, under

any circumstances, could possibly insult _me_.”



“And that’s enough for you.
Out of the way!” concluded Trudolyubov.
“Olympia is mine, friends, that’s agreed!” cried Zverkov.
“We won’t dispute your right, we won’t dispute your right,” the others

answered, laughing.
I stood as though spat upon.
The party went noisily out of the room.
Trudolyubov struck up some stupid song.
Simonov remained behind for a

moment to tip the waiters.
I suddenly went up to him.
“Simonov!
give me six roubles!” I said, with desperate resolution.
He looked at me in extreme amazement, with vacant eyes.
He, too, was

drunk.
“You don’t mean you are coming with us?”



“Yes.”



“I’ve no money,” he snapped out, and with a scornful laugh he went out

of the room.
I clutched at his overcoat.
It was a nightmare.
“Simonov, I saw you had money.
Why do you refuse me?
Am I a scoundrel?
Beware of refusing me: if you knew, if you knew why I am asking!
My

whole future, my whole plans depend upon it!”



Simonov pulled out the money and almost flung it at me.
“Take it, if you have no sense of shame!” he pronounced pitilessly, and

ran to overtake them.
I was left for a moment alone.
Disorder, the remains of dinner, a

broken wine-glass on the floor, spilt wine, cigarette ends, fumes of

drink and delirium in my brain, an agonising misery in my heart and

finally the waiter, who had seen and heard all and was looking

inquisitively into my face.
“I am going there!” I cried.
“Either they shall all go down on their

knees to beg for my friendship, or I will give Zverkov a slap in the

face!”









V





“So this is it, this is it at last—contact with real life,” I muttered

as I ran headlong downstairs.
“This is very different from the Pope’s

leaving Rome and going to Brazil, very different from the ball on Lake

Como!”



“You are a scoundrel,” a thought flashed through my mind, “if you laugh

at this now.”



“No matter!” I cried, answering myself.
“Now everything is lost!”



There was no trace to be seen of them, but that made no difference—I

knew where they had gone.
At the steps was standing a solitary night sledge-driver in a rough

peasant coat, powdered over with the still falling, wet, and as it were

warm, snow.
It was hot and steamy.
The little shaggy piebald horse was

also covered with snow and coughing, I remember that very well.
I made

a rush for the roughly made sledge; but as soon as I raised my foot to

get into it, the recollection of how Simonov had just given me six

roubles seemed to double me up and I tumbled into the sledge like a

sack.
“No, I must do a great deal to make up for all that,” I cried.
“But I

will make up for it or perish on the spot this very night.
Start!”



We set off.
There was a perfect whirl in my head.
“They won’t go down on their knees to beg for my friendship.
That is a

mirage, cheap mirage, revolting, romantic and fantastical—that’s

another ball on Lake Como.
And so I am bound to slap Zverkov’s face!
It

is my duty to.
And so it is settled; I am flying to give him a slap in

the face.
Hurry up!”



The driver tugged at the reins.
“As soon as I go in I’ll give it him.
Ought I before giving him the

slap to say a few words by way of preface?
No.
I’ll simply go in and

give it him.
They will all be sitting in the drawing-room, and he with

Olympia on the sofa.
That damned Olympia!
She laughed at my looks on

one occasion and refused me.
I’ll pull Olympia’s hair, pull Zverkov’s

ears!
No, better one ear, and pull him by it round the room.
Maybe they

will all begin beating me and will kick me out.
That’s most likely,

indeed.
No matter!
Anyway, I shall first slap him; the initiative will

be mine; and by the laws of honour that is everything: he will be

branded and cannot wipe off the slap by any blows, by nothing but a

duel.
He will be forced to fight.
And let them beat me now.
Let them,

the ungrateful wretches!
Trudolyubov will beat me hardest, he is so

strong; Ferfitchkin will be sure to catch hold sideways and tug at my

hair.
But no matter, no matter!
That’s what I am going for.
The

blockheads will be forced at last to see the tragedy of it all!
When

they drag me to the door I shall call out to them that in reality they

are not worth my little finger.
Get on, driver, get on!” I cried to the

driver.
He started and flicked his whip, I shouted so savagely.
“We shall fight at daybreak, that’s a settled thing.
I’ve done with the

office.
Ferfitchkin made a joke about it just now.
But where can I get

pistols?
Nonsense!
I’ll get my salary in advance and buy them.
And

powder, and bullets?
That’s the second’s business.
And how can it all

be done by daybreak?
and where am I to get a second?
I have no friends.
Nonsense!” I cried, lashing myself up more and more.
“It’s of no

consequence!
The first person I meet in the street is bound to be my

second, just as he would be bound to pull a drowning man out of water.
The most eccentric things may happen.
Even if I were to ask the

director himself to be my second tomorrow, he would be bound to

consent, if only from a feeling of chivalry, and to keep the secret!
Anton Antonitch....”



The fact is, that at that very minute the disgusting absurdity of my

plan and the other side of the question was clearer and more vivid to

my imagination than it could be to anyone on earth.
But ....



“Get on, driver, get on, you rascal, get on!”



“Ugh, sir!” said the son of toil.
Cold shivers suddenly ran down me.
Wouldn’t it be better ... to go

straight home?
My God, my God!
Why did I invite myself to this dinner

yesterday?
But no, it’s impossible.
And my walking up and down for

three hours from the table to the stove?
No, they, they and no one else

must pay for my walking up and down!
They must wipe out this dishonour!
Drive on!
And what if they give me into custody?
They won’t dare!
They’ll be

afraid of the scandal.
And what if Zverkov is so contemptuous that he

refuses to fight a duel?
He is sure to; but in that case I’ll show them

...
I will turn up at the posting station when he’s setting off

tomorrow, I’ll catch him by the leg, I’ll pull off his coat when he

gets into the carriage.
I’ll get my teeth into his hand, I’ll bite him.
“See what lengths you can drive a desperate man to!” He may hit me on

the head and they may belabour me from behind.
I will shout to the

assembled multitude: “Look at this young puppy who is driving off to

captivate the Circassian girls after letting me spit in his face!”



Of course, after that everything will be over!
The office will have

vanished off the face of the earth.
I shall be arrested, I shall be

tried, I shall be dismissed from the service, thrown in prison, sent to

Siberia.
Never mind!
In fifteen years when they let me out of prison I

will trudge off to him, a beggar, in rags.
I shall find him in some

provincial town.
He will be married and happy.
He will have a grown-up

daughter....
I shall say to him: “Look, monster, at my hollow cheeks

and my rags!
I’ve lost everything—my career, my happiness, art,

science, _the woman I loved_, and all through you.
Here are pistols.
I

have come to discharge my pistol and ... and I ... forgive you.
Then I

shall fire into the air and he will hear nothing more of me....”



I was actually on the point of tears, though I knew perfectly well at

that moment that all this was out of Pushkin’s _Silvio_ and Lermontov’s

_Masquerade_.
And all at once I felt horribly ashamed, so ashamed that

I stopped the horse, got out of the sledge, and stood still in the snow

in the middle of the street.
The driver gazed at me, sighing and

astonished.
What was I to do?
I could not go on there—it was evidently stupid, and

I could not leave things as they were, because that would seem as

though ... Heavens, how could I leave things!
And after such insults!
“No!” I cried, throwing myself into the sledge again.
“It is ordained!
It is fate!
Drive on, drive on!”



And in my impatience I punched the sledge-driver on the back of the

neck.
“What are you up to?
What are you hitting me for?” the peasant shouted,

but he whipped up his nag so that it began kicking.
The wet snow was falling in big flakes; I unbuttoned myself, regardless

of it.
I forgot everything else, for I had finally decided on the slap,

and felt with horror that it was going to happen _now, at once_, and

that _no force could stop it_.
The deserted street lamps gleamed

sullenly in the snowy darkness like torches at a funeral.
The snow

drifted under my great-coat, under my coat, under my cravat, and melted

there.
I did not wrap myself up—all was lost, anyway.
At last we arrived.
I jumped out, almost unconscious, ran up the steps

and began knocking and kicking at the door.
I felt fearfully weak,

particularly in my legs and knees.
The door was opened quickly as

though they knew I was coming.
As a fact, Simonov had warned them that

perhaps another gentleman would arrive, and this was a place in which

one had to give notice and to observe certain precautions.
It was one

of those “millinery establishments” which were abolished by the police

a good time ago.
By day it really was a shop; but at night, if one had

an introduction, one might visit it for other purposes.
I walked rapidly through the dark shop into the familiar drawing-room,

where there was only one candle burning, and stood still in amazement:

there was no one there.
“Where are they?” I asked somebody.
But by now,

of course, they had separated.
Before me was standing a person with a

stupid smile, the “madam” herself, who had seen me before.
A minute

later a door opened and another person came in.
Taking no notice of anything I strode about the room, and, I believe, I

talked to myself.
I felt as though I had been saved from death and was

conscious of this, joyfully, all over: I should have given that slap, I

should certainly, certainly have given it!
But now they were not here

and ... everything had vanished and changed!
I looked round.
I could

not realise my condition yet.
I looked mechanically at the girl who had

come in: and had a glimpse of a fresh, young, rather pale face, with

straight, dark eyebrows, and with grave, as it were wondering, eyes

that attracted me at once; I should have hated her if she had been

smiling.
I began looking at her more intently and, as it were, with

effort.
I had not fully collected my thoughts.
There was something

simple and good-natured in her face, but something strangely grave.
I

am sure that this stood in her way here, and no one of those fools had

noticed her.
She could not, however, have been called a beauty, though

she was tall, strong-looking, and well built.
She was very simply

dressed.
Something loathsome stirred within me.
I went straight up to

her.
I chanced to look into the glass.
My harassed face struck me as

revolting in the extreme, pale, angry, abject, with dishevelled hair.
“No matter, I am glad of it,” I thought; “I am glad that I shall seem

repulsive to her; I like that.”









VI





... Somewhere behind a screen a clock began wheezing, as though

oppressed by something, as though someone were strangling it.
After an

unnaturally prolonged wheezing there followed a shrill, nasty, and as

it were unexpectedly rapid, chime—as though someone were suddenly

jumping forward.
It struck two.
I woke up, though I had indeed not been

asleep but lying half-conscious.
It was almost completely dark in the narrow, cramped, low-pitched room,

cumbered up with an enormous wardrobe and piles of cardboard boxes and

all sorts of frippery and litter.
The candle end that had been burning

on the table was going out and gave a faint flicker from time to time.
In a few minutes there would be complete darkness.
I was not long in coming to myself; everything came back to my mind at

once, without an effort, as though it had been in ambush to pounce upon

me again.
And, indeed, even while I was unconscious a point seemed

continually to remain in my memory unforgotten, and round it my dreams

moved drearily.
But strange to say, everything that had happened to me

in that day seemed to me now, on waking, to be in the far, far away

past, as though I had long, long ago lived all that down.
My head was full of fumes.
Something seemed to be hovering over me,

rousing me, exciting me, and making me restless.
Misery and spite

seemed surging up in me again and seeking an outlet.
Suddenly I saw

beside me two wide open eyes scrutinising me curiously and

persistently.
The look in those eyes was coldly detached, sullen, as it

were utterly remote; it weighed upon me.
A grim idea came into my brain and passed all over my body, as a

horrible sensation, such as one feels when one goes into a damp and

mouldy cellar.
There was something unnatural in those two eyes,

beginning to look at me only now.
I recalled, too, that during those

two hours I had not said a single word to this creature, and had, in

fact, considered it utterly superfluous; in fact, the silence had for

some reason gratified me.
Now I suddenly realised vividly the hideous

idea—revolting as a spider—of vice, which, without love, grossly and

shamelessly begins with that in which true love finds its consummation.
For a long time we gazed at each other like that, but she did not drop

her eyes before mine and her expression did not change, so that at last

I felt uncomfortable.
“What is your name?” I asked abruptly, to put an end to it.
“Liza,” she answered almost in a whisper, but somehow far from

graciously, and she turned her eyes away.
I was silent.
“What weather!
The snow ... it’s disgusting!” I said, almost to myself,

putting my arm under my head despondently, and gazing at the ceiling.
She made no answer.
This was horrible.
“Have you always lived in Petersburg?” I asked a minute later, almost

angrily, turning my head slightly towards her.
“No.”



“Where do you come from?”



“From Riga,” she answered reluctantly.
“Are you a German?”



“No, Russian.”



“Have you been here long?”



“Where?”



“In this house?”



“A fortnight.”



She spoke more and more jerkily.
The candle went out; I could no longer

distinguish her face.
“Have you a father and mother?”



“Yes ... no ...
I have.”



“Where are they?”



“There ... in Riga.”



“What are they?”



“Oh, nothing.”



“Nothing?
Why, what class are they?”



“Tradespeople.”



“Have you always lived with them?”



“Yes.”



“How old are you?”



“Twenty.”



“Why did you leave them?”



“Oh, for no reason.”



That answer meant “Let me alone; I feel sick, sad.”



We were silent.
God knows why I did not go away.
I felt myself more and more sick and

dreary.
The images of the previous day began of themselves, apart from

my will, flitting through my memory in confusion.
I suddenly recalled

something I had seen that morning when, full of anxious thoughts, I was

hurrying to the office.
“I saw them carrying a coffin out yesterday and they nearly dropped

it,” I suddenly said aloud, not that I desired to open the

conversation, but as it were by accident.
“A coffin?”



“Yes, in the Haymarket; they were bringing it up out of a cellar.”



“From a cellar?”



“Not from a cellar, but a basement.
Oh, you know ... down below ...

from a house of ill-fame.
It was filthy all round ... Egg-shells,

litter ... a stench.
It was loathsome.”



Silence.
“A nasty day to be buried,” I began, simply to avoid being silent.
“Nasty, in what way?”



“The snow, the wet.” (I yawned.)
“It makes no difference,” she said suddenly, after a brief silence.
“No, it’s horrid.” (I yawned again).
“The gravediggers must have sworn

at getting drenched by the snow.
And there must have been water in the

grave.”



“Why water in the grave?” she asked, with a sort of curiosity, but

speaking even more harshly and abruptly than before.
I suddenly began to feel provoked.
“Why, there must have been water at the bottom a foot deep.
You can’t

dig a dry grave in Volkovo Cemetery.”



“Why?”



“Why?
Why, the place is waterlogged.
It’s a regular marsh.
So they bury

them in water.
I’ve seen it myself ... many times.”



(I had never seen it once, indeed I had never been in Volkovo, and had

only heard stories of it.)
“Do you mean to say, you don’t mind how you die?”



“But why should I die?” she answered, as though defending herself.
“Why, some day you will die, and you will die just the same as that

dead woman.
She was ... a girl like you.
She died of consumption.”



“A wench would have died in hospital ...” (She knows all about it

already: she said “wench,” not “girl.”)



“She was in debt to her madam,” I retorted, more and more provoked by

the discussion; “and went on earning money for her up to the end,

though she was in consumption.
Some sledge-drivers standing by were

talking about her to some soldiers and telling them so.
No doubt they

knew her.
They were laughing.
They were going to meet in a pot-house to

drink to her memory.”



A great deal of this was my invention.
Silence followed, profound

silence.
She did not stir.
“And is it better to die in a hospital?”



“Isn’t it just the same?
Besides, why should I die?” she added

irritably.
“If not now, a little later.”



“Why a little later?”



“Why, indeed?
Now you are young, pretty, fresh, you fetch a high price.
But after another year of this life you will be very different—you will

go off.”



“In a year?”



“Anyway, in a year you will be worth less,” I continued malignantly.
“You will go from here to something lower, another house; a year

later—to a third, lower and lower, and in seven years you will come to

a basement in the Haymarket.
That will be if you were lucky.
But it

would be much worse if you got some disease, consumption, say ... and

caught a chill, or something or other.
It’s not easy to get over an

illness in your way of life.
If you catch anything you may not get rid

of it.
And so you would die.”



“Oh, well, then I shall die,” she answered, quite vindictively, and she

made a quick movement.
“But one is sorry.”



“Sorry for whom?”



“Sorry for life.” Silence.
“Have you been engaged to be married?
Eh?”



“What’s that to you?”



“Oh, I am not cross-examining you.
It’s nothing to me.
Why are you so

cross?
Of course you may have had your own troubles.
What is it to me?
It’s simply that I felt sorry.”



“Sorry for whom?”



“Sorry for you.”



“No need,” she whispered hardly audibly, and again made a faint

movement.
That incensed me at once.
What!
I was so gentle with her, and she....



“Why, do you think that you are on the right path?”



“I don’t think anything.”



“That’s what’s wrong, that you don’t think.
Realise it while there is

still time.
There still is time.
You are still young, good-looking; you

might love, be married, be happy....”



“Not all married women are happy,” she snapped out in the rude abrupt

tone she had used at first.
“Not all, of course, but anyway it is much better than the life here.
Infinitely better.
Besides, with love one can live even without

happiness.
Even in sorrow life is sweet; life is sweet, however one

lives.
But here what is there but ... foulness?
Phew!”



I turned away with disgust; I was no longer reasoning coldly.
I began

to feel myself what I was saying and warmed to the subject.
I was

already longing to expound the cherished ideas I had brooded over in my

corner.
Something suddenly flared up in me.
An object had appeared

before me.
“Never mind my being here, I am not an example for you.
I am, perhaps,

worse than you are.
I was drunk when I came here, though,” I hastened,

however, to say in self-defence.
“Besides, a man is no example for a

woman.
It’s a different thing.
I may degrade and defile myself, but I

am not anyone’s slave.
I come and go, and that’s an end of it.
I shake

it off, and I am a different man.
But you are a slave from the start.
Yes, a slave!
You give up everything, your whole freedom.
If you want

to break your chains afterwards, you won’t be able to; you will be more

and more fast in the snares.
It is an accursed bondage.
I know it.
I

won’t speak of anything else, maybe you won’t understand, but tell me:

no doubt you are in debt to your madam?
There, you see,” I added,

though she made no answer, but only listened in silence, entirely

absorbed, “that’s a bondage for you!
You will never buy your freedom.
They will see to that.
It’s like selling your soul to the devil.... And

besides ... perhaps, I too, am just as unlucky—how do you know—and

wallow in the mud on purpose, out of misery?
You know, men take to

drink from grief; well, maybe I am here from grief.
Come, tell me, what

is there good here?
Here you and I ... came together ... just now and

did not say one word to one another all the time, and it was only

afterwards you began staring at me like a wild creature, and I at you.
Is that loving?
Is that how one human being should meet another?
It’s

hideous, that’s what it is!”



“Yes!” she assented sharply and hurriedly.
I was positively astounded by the promptitude of this “Yes.” So the

same thought may have been straying through her mind when she was

staring at me just before.
So she, too, was capable of certain

thoughts?
“Damn it all, this was interesting, this was a point of

likeness!” I thought, almost rubbing my hands.
And indeed it’s easy to

turn a young soul like that!
It was the exercise of my power that attracted me most.
She turned her head nearer to me, and it seemed to me in the darkness

that she propped herself on her arm.
Perhaps she was scrutinising me.
How I regretted that I could not see her eyes.
I heard her deep

breathing.
“Why have you come here?” I asked her, with a note of authority already

in my voice.
“Oh, I don’t know.”



“But how nice it would be to be living in your father’s house!
It’s

warm and free; you have a home of your own.”



“But what if it’s worse than this?”



“I must take the right tone,” flashed through my mind.
“I may not get

far with sentimentality.” But it was only a momentary thought.
I swear

she really did interest me.
Besides, I was exhausted and moody.
And

cunning so easily goes hand-in-hand with feeling.
“Who denies it!” I hastened to answer.
“Anything may happen.
I am

convinced that someone has wronged you, and that you are more sinned

against than sinning.
Of course, I know nothing of your story, but it’s

not likely a girl like you has come here of her own inclination....”



“A girl like me?” she whispered, hardly audibly; but I heard it.
Damn it all, I was flattering her.
That was horrid.
But perhaps it was

a good thing.... She was silent.
“See, Liza, I will tell you about myself.
If I had had a home from

childhood, I shouldn’t be what I am now.
I often think that.
However

bad it may be at home, anyway they are your father and mother, and not

enemies, strangers.
Once a year at least, they’ll show their love of

you.
Anyway, you know you are at home.
I grew up without a home; and

perhaps that’s why I’ve turned so ... unfeeling.”



I waited again.
“Perhaps she doesn’t understand,” I thought, “and,

indeed, it is absurd—it’s moralising.”



“If I were a father and had a daughter, I believe I should love my

daughter more than my sons, really,” I began indirectly, as though

talking of something else, to distract her attention.
I must confess I

blushed.
“Why so?” she asked.
Ah!
so she was listening!
“I don’t know, Liza.
I knew a father who was a stern, austere man, but

used to go down on his knees to his daughter, used to kiss her hands,

her feet, he couldn’t make enough of her, really.
When she danced at

parties he used to stand for five hours at a stretch, gazing at her.
He

was mad over her: I understand that!
She would fall asleep tired at

night, and he would wake to kiss her in her sleep and make the sign of

the cross over her.
He would go about in a dirty old coat, he was

stingy to everyone else, but would spend his last penny for her, giving

her expensive presents, and it was his greatest delight when she was

pleased with what he gave her.
Fathers always love their daughters more

than the mothers do.
Some girls live happily at home!
And I believe I

should never let my daughters marry.”



“What next?” she said, with a faint smile.
“I should be jealous, I really should.
To think that she should kiss

anyone else!
That she should love a stranger more than her father!
It’s

painful to imagine it.
Of course, that’s all nonsense, of course every

father would be reasonable at last.
But I believe before I should let

her marry, I should worry myself to death; I should find fault with all

her suitors.
But I should end by letting her marry whom she herself

loved.
The one whom the daughter loves always seems the worst to the

father, you know.
That is always so.
So many family troubles come from

that.”



“Some are glad to sell their daughters, rather than marrying them

honourably.”



Ah, so that was it!
“Such a thing, Liza, happens in those accursed families in which there

is neither love nor God,” I retorted warmly, “and where there is no

love, there is no sense either.
There are such families, it’s true, but

I am not speaking of them.
You must have seen wickedness in your own

family, if you talk like that.
Truly, you must have been unlucky.
H’m!
... that sort of thing mostly comes about through poverty.”



“And is it any better with the gentry?
Even among the poor, honest

people who live happily?”



“H’m ... yes.
Perhaps.
Another thing, Liza, man is fond of reckoning up

his troubles, but does not count his joys.
If he counted them up as he

ought, he would see that every lot has enough happiness provided for

it.
And what if all goes well with the family, if the blessing of God

is upon it, if the husband is a good one, loves you, cherishes you,

never leaves you!
There is happiness in such a family!
Even sometimes

there is happiness in the midst of sorrow; and indeed sorrow is

everywhere.
If you marry _you will find out for yourself_.
But think of

the first years of married life with one you love: what happiness, what

happiness there sometimes is in it!
And indeed it’s the ordinary thing.
In those early days even quarrels with one’s husband end happily.
Some

women get up quarrels with their husbands just because they love them.
Indeed, I knew a woman like that: she seemed to say that because she

loved him, she would torment him and make him feel it.
You know that

you may torment a man on purpose through love.
Women are particularly

given to that, thinking to themselves ‘I will love him so, I will make

so much of him afterwards, that it’s no sin to torment him a little

now.’ And all in the house rejoice in the sight of you, and you are

happy and gay and peaceful and honourable.... Then there are some women

who are jealous.
If he went off anywhere—I knew one such woman, she

couldn’t restrain herself, but would jump up at night and run off on

the sly to find out where he was, whether he was with some other woman.
That’s a pity.
And the woman knows herself it’s wrong, and her heart

fails her and she suffers, but she loves—it’s all through love.
And how

sweet it is to make up after quarrels, to own herself in the wrong or

to forgive him!
And they both are so happy all at once—as though they

had met anew, been married over again; as though their love had begun

afresh.
And no one, no one should know what passes between husband and

wife if they love one another.
And whatever quarrels there may be

between them they ought not to call in their own mother to judge

between them and tell tales of one another.
They are their own judges.
Love is a holy mystery and ought to be hidden from all other eyes,

whatever happens.
That makes it holier and better.
They respect one

another more, and much is built on respect.
And if once there has been

love, if they have been married for love, why should love pass away?
Surely one can keep it!
It is rare that one cannot keep it.
And if the

husband is kind and straightforward, why should not love last?
The

first phase of married love will pass, it is true, but then there will

come a love that is better still.
Then there will be the union of

souls, they will have everything in common, there will be no secrets

between them.
And once they have children, the most difficult times

will seem to them happy, so long as there is love and courage.
Even

toil will be a joy, you may deny yourself bread for your children and

even that will be a joy, They will love you for it afterwards; so you

are laying by for your future.
As the children grow up you feel that

you are an example, a support for them; that even after you die your

children will always keep your thoughts and feelings, because they have

received them from you, they will take on your semblance and likeness.
So you see this is a great duty.
How can it fail to draw the father and

mother nearer?
People say it’s a trial to have children.
Who says that?
It is heavenly happiness!
Are you fond of little children, Liza?
I am

awfully fond of them.
You know—a little rosy baby boy at your bosom,

and what husband’s heart is not touched, seeing his wife nursing his

child!
A plump little rosy baby, sprawling and snuggling, chubby little

hands and feet, clean tiny little nails, so tiny that it makes one

laugh to look at them; eyes that look as if they understand everything.
And while it sucks it clutches at your bosom with its little hand,

plays.
When its father comes up, the child tears itself away from the

bosom, flings itself back, looks at its father, laughs, as though it

were fearfully funny, and falls to sucking again.
Or it will bite its

mother’s breast when its little teeth are coming, while it looks

sideways at her with its little eyes as though to say, ‘Look, I am

biting!’ Is not all that happiness when they are the three together,

husband, wife and child?
One can forgive a great deal for the sake of

such moments.
Yes, Liza, one must first learn to live oneself before

one blames others!”



“It’s by pictures, pictures like that one must get at you,” I thought

to myself, though I did speak with real feeling, and all at once I

flushed crimson.
“What if she were suddenly to burst out laughing, what

should I do then?” That idea drove me to fury.
Towards the end of my

speech I really was excited, and now my vanity was somehow wounded.
The

silence continued.
I almost nudged her.
“Why are you—” she began and stopped.
But I understood: there was a

quiver of something different in her voice, not abrupt, harsh and

unyielding as before, but something soft and shamefaced, so shamefaced

that I suddenly felt ashamed and guilty.
“What?” I asked, with tender curiosity.
“Why, you...”



“What?”



“Why, you ... speak somehow like a book,” she said, and again there was

a note of irony in her voice.
That remark sent a pang to my heart.
It was not what I was expecting.
I did not understand that she was hiding her feelings under irony, that

this is usually the last refuge of modest and chaste-souled people when

the privacy of their soul is coarsely and intrusively invaded, and that

their pride makes them refuse to surrender till the last moment and

shrink from giving expression to their feelings before you.
I ought to

have guessed the truth from the timidity with which she had repeatedly

approached her sarcasm, only bringing herself to utter it at last with

an effort.
But I did not guess, and an evil feeling took possession of

me.
“Wait a bit!” I thought.
VII





“Oh, hush, Liza!
How can you talk about being like a book, when it

makes even me, an outsider, feel sick?
Though I don’t look at it as an

outsider, for, indeed, it touches me to the heart.... Is it possible,

is it possible that you do not feel sick at being here yourself?
Evidently habit does wonders!
God knows what habit can do with anyone.
Can you seriously think that you will never grow old, that you will

always be good-looking, and that they will keep you here for ever and

ever?
I say nothing of the loathsomeness of the life here....
Though

let me tell you this about it—about your present life, I mean; here

though you are young now, attractive, nice, with soul and feeling, yet

you know as soon as I came to myself just now I felt at once sick at

being here with you!
One can only come here when one is drunk.
But if

you were anywhere else, living as good people live, I should perhaps be

more than attracted by you, should fall in love with you, should be

glad of a look from you, let alone a word; I should hang about your

door, should go down on my knees to you, should look upon you as my

betrothed and think it an honour to be allowed to.
I should not dare to

have an impure thought about you.
But here, you see, I know that I have

only to whistle and you have to come with me whether you like it or

not.
I don’t consult your wishes, but you mine.
The lowest labourer

hires himself as a workman, but he doesn’t make a slave of himself

altogether; besides, he knows that he will be free again presently.
But

when are you free?
Only think what you are giving up here?
What is it

you are making a slave of?
It is your soul, together with your body;

you are selling your soul which you have no right to dispose of!
You

give your love to be outraged by every drunkard!
Love!
But that’s

everything, you know, it’s a priceless diamond, it’s a maiden’s

treasure, love—why, a man would be ready to give his soul, to face

death to gain that love.
But how much is your love worth now?
You are

sold, all of you, body and soul, and there is no need to strive for

love when you can have everything without love.
And you know there is

no greater insult to a girl than that, do you understand?
To be sure, I

have heard that they comfort you, poor fools, they let you have lovers

of your own here.
But you know that’s simply a farce, that’s simply a

sham, it’s just laughing at you, and you are taken in by it!
Why, do

you suppose he really loves you, that lover of yours?
I don’t believe

it.
How can he love you when he knows you may be called away from him

any minute?
He would be a low fellow if he did!
Will he have a grain of

respect for you?
What have you in common with him?
He laughs at you and

robs you—that is all his love amounts to!
You are lucky if he does not

beat you.
Very likely he does beat you, too.
Ask him, if you have got

one, whether he will marry you.
He will laugh in your face, if he

doesn’t spit in it or give you a blow—though maybe he is not worth a

bad halfpenny himself.
And for what have you ruined your life, if you

come to think of it?
For the coffee they give you to drink and the

plentiful meals?
But with what object are they feeding you up?
An

honest girl couldn’t swallow the food, for she would know what she was

being fed for.
You are in debt here, and, of course, you will always be

in debt, and you will go on in debt to the end, till the visitors here

begin to scorn you.
And that will soon happen, don’t rely upon your

youth—all that flies by express train here, you know.
You will be

kicked out.
And not simply kicked out; long before that she’ll begin

nagging at you, scolding you, abusing you, as though you had not

sacrificed your health for her, had not thrown away your youth and your

soul for her benefit, but as though you had ruined her, beggared her,

robbed her.
And don’t expect anyone to take your part: the others, your

companions, will attack you, too, win her favour, for all are in

slavery here, and have lost all conscience and pity here long ago.
They

have become utterly vile, and nothing on earth is viler, more

loathsome, and more insulting than their abuse.
And you are laying down

everything here, unconditionally, youth and health and beauty and hope,

and at twenty-two you will look like a woman of five-and-thirty, and

you will be lucky if you are not diseased, pray to God for that!
No

doubt you are thinking now that you have a gay time and no work to do!
Yet there is no work harder or more dreadful in the world or ever has

been.
One would think that the heart alone would be worn out with

tears.
And you won’t dare to say a word, not half a word when they

drive you away from here; you will go away as though you were to blame.
You will change to another house, then to a third, then somewhere else,

till you come down at last to the Haymarket.
There you will be beaten

at every turn; that is good manners there, the visitors don’t know how

to be friendly without beating you.
You don’t believe that it is so

hateful there?
Go and look for yourself some time, you can see with

your own eyes.
Once, one New Year’s Day, I saw a woman at a door.
They

had turned her out as a joke, to give her a taste of the frost because

she had been crying so much, and they shut the door behind her.
At nine

o’clock in the morning she was already quite drunk, dishevelled,

half-naked, covered with bruises, her face was powdered, but she had a

black-eye, blood was trickling from her nose and her teeth; some cabman

had just given her a drubbing.
She was sitting on the stone steps, a

salt fish of some sort was in her hand; she was crying, wailing

something about her luck and beating with the fish on the steps, and

cabmen and drunken soldiers were crowding in the doorway taunting her.
You don’t believe that you will ever be like that?
I should be sorry to

believe it, too, but how do you know; maybe ten years, eight years ago

that very woman with the salt fish came here fresh as a cherub,

innocent, pure, knowing no evil, blushing at every word.
Perhaps she

was like you, proud, ready to take offence, not like the others;

perhaps she looked like a queen, and knew what happiness was in store

for the man who should love her and whom she should love.
Do you see

how it ended?
And what if at that very minute when she was beating on

the filthy steps with that fish, drunken and dishevelled—what if at

that very minute she recalled the pure early days in her father’s

house, when she used to go to school and the neighbour’s son watched

for her on the way, declaring that he would love her as long as he

lived, that he would devote his life to her, and when they vowed to

love one another for ever and be married as soon as they were grown up!
No, Liza, it would be happy for you if you were to die soon of

consumption in some corner, in some cellar like that woman just now.
In

the hospital, do you say?
You will be lucky if they take you, but what

if you are still of use to the madam here?
Consumption is a queer

disease, it is not like fever.
The patient goes on hoping till the last

minute and says he is all right.
He deludes himself And that just suits

your madam.
Don’t doubt it, that’s how it is; you have sold your soul,

and what is more you owe money, so you daren’t say a word.
But when you

are dying, all will abandon you, all will turn away from you, for then

there will be nothing to get from you.
What’s more, they will reproach

you for cumbering the place, for being so long over dying.
However you

beg you won’t get a drink of water without abuse: ‘Whenever are you

going off, you nasty hussy, you won’t let us sleep with your moaning,

you make the gentlemen sick.’ That’s true, I have heard such things

said myself.
They will thrust you dying into the filthiest corner in

the cellar—in the damp and darkness; what will your thoughts be, lying

there alone?
When you die, strange hands will lay you out, with

grumbling and impatience; no one will bless you, no one will sigh for

you, they only want to get rid of you as soon as may be; they will buy

a coffin, take you to the grave as they did that poor woman today, and

celebrate your memory at the tavern.
In the grave, sleet, filth, wet

snow—no need to put themselves out for you—‘Let her down, Vanuha; it’s

just like her luck—even here, she is head-foremost, the hussy.
Shorten

the cord, you rascal.’ ‘It’s all right as it is.’ ‘All right, is it?
Why, she’s on her side!
She was a fellow-creature, after all!
But,

never mind, throw the earth on her.’ And they won’t care to waste much

time quarrelling over you.
They will scatter the wet blue clay as quick

as they can and go off to the tavern ... and there your memory on earth

will end; other women have children to go to their graves, fathers,

husbands.
While for you neither tear, nor sigh, nor remembrance; no one

in the whole world will ever come to you, your name will vanish from

the face of the earth—as though you had never existed, never been born

at all!
Nothing but filth and mud, however you knock at your coffin lid

at night, when the dead arise, however you cry: ‘Let me out, kind

people, to live in the light of day!
My life was no life at all; my

life has been thrown away like a dish-clout; it was drunk away in the

tavern at the Haymarket; let me out, kind people, to live in the world

again.’”



And I worked myself up to such a pitch that I began to have a lump in

my throat myself, and ... and all at once I stopped, sat up in dismay

and, bending over apprehensively, began to listen with a beating heart.
I had reason to be troubled.
I had felt for some time that I was turning her soul upside down and

rending her heart, and—and the more I was convinced of it, the more

eagerly I desired to gain my object as quickly and as effectually as

possible.
It was the exercise of my skill that carried me away; yet it

was not merely sport....
I knew I was speaking stiffly, artificially, even bookishly, in fact, I

could not speak except “like a book.” But that did not trouble me: I

knew, I felt that I should be understood and that this very bookishness

might be an assistance.
But now, having attained my effect, I was

suddenly panic-stricken.
Never before had I witnessed such despair!
She

was lying on her face, thrusting her face into the pillow and clutching

it in both hands.
Her heart was being torn.
Her youthful body was

shuddering all over as though in convulsions.
Suppressed sobs rent her

bosom and suddenly burst out in weeping and wailing, then she pressed

closer into the pillow: she did not want anyone here, not a living

soul, to know of her anguish and her tears.
She bit the pillow, bit her

hand till it bled (I saw that afterwards), or, thrusting her fingers

into her dishevelled hair, seemed rigid with the effort of restraint,

holding her breath and clenching her teeth.
I began saying something,

begging her to calm herself, but felt that I did not dare; and all at

once, in a sort of cold shiver, almost in terror, began fumbling in the

dark, trying hurriedly to get dressed to go.
It was dark; though I

tried my best I could not finish dressing quickly.
Suddenly I felt a

box of matches and a candlestick with a whole candle in it.
As soon as

the room was lighted up, Liza sprang up, sat up in bed, and with a

contorted face, with a half insane smile, looked at me almost

senselessly.
I sat down beside her and took her hands; she came to

herself, made an impulsive movement towards me, would have caught hold

of me, but did not dare, and slowly bowed her head before me.
“Liza, my dear, I was wrong ... forgive me, my dear,” I began, but she

squeezed my hand in her fingers so tightly that I felt I was saying the

wrong thing and stopped.
“This is my address, Liza, come to me.”



“I will come,” she answered resolutely, her head still bowed.
“But now I am going, good-bye ... till we meet again.”



I got up; she, too, stood up and suddenly flushed all over, gave a

shudder, snatched up a shawl that was lying on a chair and muffled

herself in it to her chin.
As she did this she gave another sickly

smile, blushed and looked at me strangely.
I felt wretched; I was in

haste to get away—to disappear.
“Wait a minute,” she said suddenly, in the passage just at the doorway,

stopping me with her hand on my overcoat.
She put down the candle in

hot haste and ran off; evidently she had thought of something or wanted

to show me something.
As she ran away she flushed, her eyes shone, and

there was a smile on her lips—what was the meaning of it?
Against my

will I waited: she came back a minute later with an expression that

seemed to ask forgiveness for something.
In fact, it was not the same

face, not the same look as the evening before: sullen, mistrustful and

obstinate.
Her eyes now were imploring, soft, and at the same time

trustful, caressing, timid.
The expression with which children look at

people they are very fond of, of whom they are asking a favour.
Her

eyes were a light hazel, they were lovely eyes, full of life, and

capable of expressing love as well as sullen hatred.
Making no explanation, as though I, as a sort of higher being, must

understand everything without explanations, she held out a piece of

paper to me.
Her whole face was positively beaming at that instant with

naive, almost childish, triumph.
I unfolded it.
It was a letter to her

from a medical student or someone of that sort—a very high-flown and

flowery, but extremely respectful, love-letter.
I don’t recall the

words now, but I remember well that through the high-flown phrases

there was apparent a genuine feeling, which cannot be feigned.
When I

had finished reading it I met her glowing, questioning, and childishly

impatient eyes fixed upon me.
She fastened her eyes upon my face and

waited impatiently for what I should say.
In a few words, hurriedly,

but with a sort of joy and pride, she explained to me that she had been

to a dance somewhere in a private house, a family of “very nice people,

_who knew nothing_, absolutely nothing, for she had only come here so

lately and it had all happened ... and she hadn’t made up her mind to

stay and was certainly going away as soon as she had paid her debt...”

and at that party there had been the student who had danced with her

all the evening.
He had talked to her, and it turned out that he had

known her in old days at Riga when he was a child, they had played

together, but a very long time ago—and he knew her parents, but _about

this_ he knew nothing, nothing whatever, and had no suspicion!
And the

day after the dance (three days ago) he had sent her that letter

through the friend with whom she had gone to the party ... and ...

well, that was all.
She dropped her shining eyes with a sort of bashfulness as she

finished.
The poor girl was keeping that student’s letter as a precious treasure,

and had run to fetch it, her only treasure, because she did not want me

to go away without knowing that she, too, was honestly and genuinely

loved; that she, too, was addressed respectfully.
No doubt that letter

was destined to lie in her box and lead to nothing.
But none the less,

I am certain that she would keep it all her life as a precious

treasure, as her pride and justification, and now at such a minute she

had thought of that letter and brought it with naive pride to raise

herself in my eyes that I might see, that I, too, might think well of

her.
I said nothing, pressed her hand and went out.
I so longed to get

away ...
I walked all the way home, in spite of the fact that the

melting snow was still falling in heavy flakes.
I was exhausted,

shattered, in bewilderment.
But behind the bewilderment the truth was

already gleaming.
The loathsome truth.
VIII





It was some time, however, before I consented to recognise that truth.
Waking up in the morning after some hours of heavy, leaden sleep, and

immediately realising all that had happened on the previous day, I was

positively amazed at my last night’s _sentimentality_ with Liza, at all

those “outcries of horror and pity.” “To think of having such an attack

of womanish hysteria, pah!” I concluded.
And what did I thrust my

address upon her for?
What if she comes?
Let her come, though; it

doesn’t matter....
But _obviously_, that was not now the chief and the

most important matter: I had to make haste and at all costs save my

reputation in the eyes of Zverkov and Simonov as quickly as possible;

that was the chief business.
And I was so taken up that morning that I

actually forgot all about Liza.
First of all I had at once to repay what I had borrowed the day before

from Simonov.
I resolved on a desperate measure: to borrow fifteen

roubles straight off from Anton Antonitch.
As luck would have it he was

in the best of humours that morning, and gave it to me at once, on the

first asking.
I was so delighted at this that, as I signed the IOU with

a swaggering air, I told him casually that the night before “I had been

keeping it up with some friends at the Hôtel de Paris; we were giving a

farewell party to a comrade, in fact, I might say a friend of my

childhood, and you know—a desperate rake, fearfully spoilt—of course,

he belongs to a good family, and has considerable means, a brilliant

career; he is witty, charming, a regular Lovelace, you understand; we

drank an extra ‘half-dozen’ and ...”



And it went off all right; all this was uttered very easily,

unconstrainedly and complacently.
On reaching home I promptly wrote to Simonov.
To this hour I am lost in admiration when I recall the truly

gentlemanly, good-humoured, candid tone of my letter.
With tact and

good-breeding, and, above all, entirely without superfluous words, I

blamed myself for all that had happened.
I defended myself, “if I

really may be allowed to defend myself,” by alleging that being utterly

unaccustomed to wine, I had been intoxicated with the first glass,

which I said, I had drunk before they arrived, while I was waiting for

them at the Hôtel de Paris between five and six o’clock.
I begged

Simonov’s pardon especially; I asked him to convey my explanations to

all the others, especially to Zverkov, whom “I seemed to remember as

though in a dream” I had insulted.
I added that I would have called

upon all of them myself, but my head ached, and besides I had not the

face to.
I was particularly pleased with a certain lightness, almost

carelessness (strictly within the bounds of politeness, however), which

was apparent in my style, and better than any possible arguments, gave

them at once to understand that I took rather an independent view of

“all that unpleasantness last night”; that I was by no means so utterly

crushed as you, my friends, probably imagine; but on the contrary,

looked upon it as a gentleman serenely respecting himself should look

upon it.
“On a young hero’s past no censure is cast!”



“There is actually an aristocratic playfulness about it!” I thought

admiringly, as I read over the letter.
“And it’s all because I am an

intellectual and cultivated man!
Another man in my place would not have

known how to extricate himself, but here I have got out of it and am as

jolly as ever again, and all because I am ‘a cultivated and educated

man of our day.’ And, indeed, perhaps, everything was due to the wine

yesterday.
H’m!” ... No, it was not the wine.
I did not drink anything

at all between five and six when I was waiting for them.
I had lied to

Simonov; I had lied shamelessly; and indeed I wasn’t ashamed now....
Hang it all though, the great thing was that I was rid of it.
I put six roubles in the letter, sealed it up, and asked Apollon to

take it to Simonov.
When he learned that there was money in the letter,

Apollon became more respectful and agreed to take it.
Towards evening I

went out for a walk.
My head was still aching and giddy after

yesterday.
But as evening came on and the twilight grew denser, my

impressions and, following them, my thoughts, grew more and more

different and confused.
Something was not dead within me, in the depths

of my heart and conscience it would not die, and it showed itself in

acute depression.
For the most part I jostled my way through the most

crowded business streets, along Myeshtchansky Street, along Sadovy

Street and in Yusupov Garden.
I always liked particularly sauntering

along these streets in the dusk, just when there were crowds of working

people of all sorts going home from their daily work, with faces

looking cross with anxiety.
What I liked was just that cheap bustle,

that bare prose.
On this occasion the jostling of the streets irritated

me more than ever, I could not make out what was wrong with me, I could

not find the clue, something seemed rising up continually in my soul,

painfully, and refusing to be appeased.
I returned home completely

upset, it was just as though some crime were lying on my conscience.
The thought that Liza was coming worried me continually.
It seemed

queer to me that of all my recollections of yesterday this tormented

me, as it were, especially, as it were, quite separately.
Everything

else I had quite succeeded in forgetting by the evening; I dismissed it

all and was still perfectly satisfied with my letter to Simonov.
But on

this point I was not satisfied at all.
It was as though I were worried

only by Liza.
“What if she comes,” I thought incessantly, “well, it

doesn’t matter, let her come!
H’m!
it’s horrid that she should see, for

instance, how I live.
Yesterday I seemed such a hero to her, while now,

h’m!
It’s horrid, though, that I have let myself go so, the room looks

like a beggar’s.
And I brought myself to go out to dinner in such a

suit!
And my American leather sofa with the stuffing sticking out.
And

my dressing-gown, which will not cover me, such tatters, and she will

see all this and she will see Apollon.
That beast is certain to insult

her.
He will fasten upon her in order to be rude to me.
And I, of

course, shall be panic-stricken as usual, I shall begin bowing and

scraping before her and pulling my dressing-gown round me, I shall

begin smiling, telling lies.
Oh, the beastliness!
And it isn’t the

beastliness of it that matters most!
There is something more important,

more loathsome, viler!
Yes, viler!
And to put on that dishonest lying

mask again!
...”



When I reached that thought I fired up all at once.
“Why dishonest?
How dishonest?
I was speaking sincerely last night.
I

remember there was real feeling in me, too.
What I wanted was to excite

an honourable feeling in her....
Her crying was a good thing, it will

have a good effect.”



Yet I could not feel at ease.
All that evening, even when I had come

back home, even after nine o’clock, when I calculated that Liza could

not possibly come, still she haunted me, and what was worse, she came

back to my mind always in the same position.
One moment out of all that

had happened last night stood vividly before my imagination; the moment

when I struck a match and saw her pale, distorted face, with its look

of torture.
And what a pitiful, what an unnatural, what a distorted

smile she had at that moment!
But I did not know then, that fifteen

years later I should still in my imagination see Liza, always with the

pitiful, distorted, inappropriate smile which was on her face at that

minute.
Next day I was ready again to look upon it all as nonsense, due to

over-excited nerves, and, above all, as _exaggerated_.
I was always

conscious of that weak point of mine, and sometimes very much afraid of

it.
“I exaggerate everything, that is where I go wrong,” I repeated to

myself every hour.
But, however, “Liza will very likely come all the

same,” was the refrain with which all my reflections ended.
I was so

uneasy that I sometimes flew into a fury: “She’ll come, she is certain

to come!” I cried, running about the room, “if not today, she will come

tomorrow; she’ll find me out!
The damnable romanticism of these pure

hearts!
Oh, the vileness—oh, the silliness—oh, the stupidity of these

‘wretched sentimental souls!’ Why, how fail to understand?
How could

one fail to understand?
...”



But at this point I stopped short, and in great confusion, indeed.
And how few, how few words, I thought, in passing, were needed; how

little of the idyllic (and affectedly, bookishly, artificially idyllic

too) had sufficed to turn a whole human life at once according to my

will.
That’s virginity, to be sure!
Freshness of soil!
At times a thought occurred to me, to go to her, “to tell her all,” and

beg her not to come to me.
But this thought stirred such wrath in me

that I believed I should have crushed that “damned” Liza if she had

chanced to be near me at the time.
I should have insulted her, have

spat at her, have turned her out, have struck her!
One day passed, however, another and another; she did not come and I

began to grow calmer.
I felt particularly bold and cheerful after nine

o’clock, I even sometimes began dreaming, and rather sweetly: I, for

instance, became the salvation of Liza, simply through her coming to me

and my talking to her....
I develop her, educate her.
Finally, I notice

that she loves me, loves me passionately.
I pretend not to understand

(I don’t know, however, why I pretend, just for effect, perhaps).
At

last all confusion, transfigured, trembling and sobbing, she flings

herself at my feet and says that I am her saviour, and that she loves

me better than anything in the world.
I am amazed, but.... “Liza,” I

say, “can you imagine that I have not noticed your love?
I saw it all,

I divined it, but I did not dare to approach you first, because I had

an influence over you and was afraid that you would force yourself,

from gratitude, to respond to my love, would try to rouse in your heart

a feeling which was perhaps absent, and I did not wish that ... because

it would be tyranny ... it would be indelicate (in short, I launch off

at that point into European, inexplicably lofty subtleties a la George

Sand), but now, now you are mine, you are my creation, you are pure,

you are good, you are my noble wife.
‘Into my house come bold and free,

Its rightful mistress there to be’.”





Then we begin living together, go abroad and so on, and so on.
In fact,

in the end it seemed vulgar to me myself, and I began putting out my

tongue at myself.
Besides, they won’t let her out, “the hussy!” I thought.
They don’t let

them go out very readily, especially in the evening (for some reason I

fancied she would come in the evening, and at seven o’clock precisely).
Though she did say she was not altogether a slave there yet, and had

certain rights; so, h’m!
Damn it all, she will come, she is sure to

come!
It was a good thing, in fact, that Apollon distracted my attention at

that time by his rudeness.
He drove me beyond all patience!
He was the

bane of my life, the curse laid upon me by Providence.
We had been

squabbling continually for years, and I hated him.
My God, how I hated

him!
I believe I had never hated anyone in my life as I hated him,

especially at some moments.
He was an elderly, dignified man, who

worked part of his time as a tailor.
But for some unknown reason he

despised me beyond all measure, and looked down upon me insufferably.
Though, indeed, he looked down upon everyone.
Simply to glance at that

flaxen, smoothly brushed head, at the tuft of hair he combed up on his

forehead and oiled with sunflower oil, at that dignified mouth,

compressed into the shape of the letter V, made one feel one was

confronting a man who never doubted of himself.
He was a pedant, to the

most extreme point, the greatest pedant I had met on earth, and with

that had a vanity only befitting Alexander of Macedon.
He was in love

with every button on his coat, every nail on his fingers—absolutely in

love with them, and he looked it!
In his behaviour to me he was a

perfect tyrant, he spoke very little to me, and if he chanced to glance

at me he gave me a firm, majestically self-confident and invariably

ironical look that drove me sometimes to fury.
He did his work with the

air of doing me the greatest favour, though he did scarcely anything

for me, and did not, indeed, consider himself bound to do anything.
There could be no doubt that he looked upon me as the greatest fool on

earth, and that “he did not get rid of me” was simply that he could get

wages from me every month.
He consented to do nothing for me for seven

roubles a month.
Many sins should be forgiven me for what I suffered

from him.
My hatred reached such a point that sometimes his very step

almost threw me into convulsions.
What I loathed particularly was his

lisp.
His tongue must have been a little too long or something of that

sort, for he continually lisped, and seemed to be very proud of it,

imagining that it greatly added to his dignity.
He spoke in a slow,

measured tone, with his hands behind his back and his eyes fixed on the

ground.
He maddened me particularly when he read aloud the psalms to

himself behind his partition.
Many a battle I waged over that reading!
But he was awfully fond of reading aloud in the evenings, in a slow,

even, sing-song voice, as though over the dead.
It is interesting that

that is how he has ended: he hires himself out to read the psalms over

the dead, and at the same time he kills rats and makes blacking.
But at

that time I could not get rid of him, it was as though he were

chemically combined with my existence.
Besides, nothing would have

induced him to consent to leave me.
I could not live in furnished

lodgings: my lodging was my private solitude, my shell, my cave, in

which I concealed myself from all mankind, and Apollon seemed to me,

for some reason, an integral part of that flat, and for seven years I

could not turn him away.
To be two or three days behind with his wages, for instance, was

impossible.
He would have made such a fuss, I should not have known

where to hide my head.
But I was so exasperated with everyone during

those days, that I made up my mind for some reason and with some object

to _punish_ Apollon and not to pay him for a fortnight the wages that

were owing him.
I had for a long time—for the last two years—been

intending to do this, simply in order to teach him not to give himself

airs with me, and to show him that if I liked I could withhold his

wages.
I purposed to say nothing to him about it, and was purposely

silent indeed, in order to score off his pride and force him to be the

first to speak of his wages.
Then I would take the seven roubles out of

a drawer, show him I have the money put aside on purpose, but that I

won’t, I won’t, I simply won’t pay him his wages, I won’t just because

that is “what I wish,” because “I am master, and it is for me to

decide,” because he has been disrespectful, because he has been rude;

but if he were to ask respectfully I might be softened and give it to

him, otherwise he might wait another fortnight, another three weeks, a

whole month....
But angry as I was, yet he got the better of me.
I could not hold out

for four days.
He began as he always did begin in such cases, for there

had been such cases already, there had been attempts (and it may be

observed I knew all this beforehand, I knew his nasty tactics by

heart).
He would begin by fixing upon me an exceedingly severe stare,

keeping it up for several minutes at a time, particularly on meeting me

or seeing me out of the house.
If I held out and pretended not to

notice these stares, he would, still in silence, proceed to further

tortures.
All at once, _à propos_ of nothing, he would walk softly and

smoothly into my room, when I was pacing up and down or reading, stand

at the door, one hand behind his back and one foot behind the other,

and fix upon me a stare more than severe, utterly contemptuous.
If I

suddenly asked him what he wanted, he would make me no answer, but

continue staring at me persistently for some seconds, then, with a

peculiar compression of his lips and a most significant air,

deliberately turn round and deliberately go back to his room.
Two hours

later he would come out again and again present himself before me in

the same way.
It had happened that in my fury I did not even ask him

what he wanted, but simply raised my head sharply and imperiously and

began staring back at him.
So we stared at one another for two minutes;

at last he turned with deliberation and dignity and went back again for

two hours.
If I were still not brought to reason by all this, but persisted in my

revolt, he would suddenly begin sighing while he looked at me, long,

deep sighs as though measuring by them the depths of my moral

degradation, and, of course, it ended at last by his triumphing

completely: I raged and shouted, but still was forced to do what he

wanted.
This time the usual staring manoeuvres had scarcely begun when I lost

my temper and flew at him in a fury.
I was irritated beyond endurance

apart from him.
“Stay,” I cried, in a frenzy, as he was slowly and silently turning,

with one hand behind his back, to go to his room.
“Stay!
Come back,

come back, I tell you!” and I must have bawled so unnaturally, that he

turned round and even looked at me with some wonder.
However, he

persisted in saying nothing, and that infuriated me.
“How dare you come and look at me like that without being sent for?
Answer!”



After looking at me calmly for half a minute, he began turning round

again.
“Stay!” I roared, running up to him, “don’t stir!
There.
Answer, now:

what did you come in to look at?”



“If you have any order to give me it’s my duty to carry it out,” he

answered, after another silent pause, with a slow, measured lisp,

raising his eyebrows and calmly twisting his head from one side to

another, all this with exasperating composure.
“That’s not what I am asking you about, you torturer!” I shouted,

turning crimson with anger.
“I’ll tell you why you came here myself:

you see, I don’t give you your wages, you are so proud you don’t want

to bow down and ask for it, and so you come to punish me with your

stupid stares, to worry me and you have no sus-pic-ion how stupid it

is—stupid, stupid, stupid, stupid!
...”



He would have turned round again without a word, but I seized him.
“Listen,” I shouted to him.
“Here’s the money, do you see, here it is,”

(I took it out of the table drawer); “here’s the seven roubles

complete, but you are not going to have it, you ... are ... not ...

going ... to ... have it until you come respectfully with bowed head to

beg my pardon.
Do you hear?”



“That cannot be,” he answered, with the most unnatural self-confidence.
“It shall be so,” I said, “I give you my word of honour, it shall be!”



“And there’s nothing for me to beg your pardon for,” he went on, as

though he had not noticed my exclamations at all.
“Why, besides, you

called me a ‘torturer,’ for which I can summon you at the

police-station at any time for insulting behaviour.”



“Go, summon me,” I roared, “go at once, this very minute, this very

second!
You are a torturer all the same!
a torturer!”



But he merely looked at me, then turned, and regardless of my loud

calls to him, he walked to his room with an even step and without

looking round.
“If it had not been for Liza nothing of this would have happened,” I

decided inwardly.
Then, after waiting a minute, I went myself behind

his screen with a dignified and solemn air, though my heart was beating

slowly and violently.
“Apollon,” I said quietly and emphatically, though I was breathless,

“go at once without a minute’s delay and fetch the police-officer.”



He had meanwhile settled himself at his table, put on his spectacles

and taken up some sewing.
But, hearing my order, he burst into a

guffaw.
“At once, go this minute!
Go on, or else you can’t imagine what will

happen.”



“You are certainly out of your mind,” he observed, without even raising

his head, lisping as deliberately as ever and threading his needle.
“Whoever heard of a man sending for the police against himself?
And as

for being frightened—you are upsetting yourself about nothing, for

nothing will come of it.”



“Go!” I shrieked, clutching him by the shoulder.
I felt I should strike

him in a minute.
But I did not notice the door from the passage softly and slowly open

at that instant and a figure come in, stop short, and begin staring at

us in perplexity I glanced, nearly swooned with shame, and rushed back

to my room.
There, clutching at my hair with both hands, I leaned my

head against the wall and stood motionless in that position.
Two minutes later I heard Apollon’s deliberate footsteps.
“There is

some woman asking for you,” he said, looking at me with peculiar

severity.
Then he stood aside and let in Liza.
He would not go away,

but stared at us sarcastically.
“Go away, go away,” I commanded in desperation.
At that moment my clock

began whirring and wheezing and struck seven.
IX





“Into my house come bold and free,

Its rightful mistress there to be.”





I stood before her crushed, crestfallen, revoltingly confused, and I

believe I smiled as I did my utmost to wrap myself in the skirts of my

ragged wadded dressing-gown—exactly as I had imagined the scene not

long before in a fit of depression.
After standing over us for a couple

of minutes Apollon went away, but that did not make me more at ease.
What made it worse was that she, too, was overwhelmed with confusion,

more so, in fact, than I should have expected.
At the sight of me, of

course.
“Sit down,” I said mechanically, moving a chair up to the table, and I

sat down on the sofa.
She obediently sat down at once and gazed at me

open-eyed, evidently expecting something from me at once.
This naïveté

of expectation drove me to fury, but I restrained myself.
She ought to have tried not to notice, as though everything had been as

usual, while instead of that, she ... and I dimly felt that I should

make her pay dearly for _all this_.
“You have found me in a strange position, Liza,” I began, stammering

and knowing that this was the wrong way to begin.
“No, no, don’t

imagine anything,” I cried, seeing that she had suddenly flushed.
“I am

not ashamed of my poverty.... On the contrary, I look with pride on my

poverty.
I am poor but honourable.... One can be poor and honourable,”

I muttered.
“However ... would you like tea?....”



“No,” she was beginning.
“Wait a minute.”



I leapt up and ran to Apollon.
I had to get out of the room somehow.
“Apollon,” I whispered in feverish haste, flinging down before him the

seven roubles which had remained all the time in my clenched fist,

“here are your wages, you see I give them to you; but for that you must

come to my rescue: bring me tea and a dozen rusks from the restaurant.
If you won’t go, you’ll make me a miserable man!
You don’t know what

this woman is....
This is—everything!
You may be imagining

something....
But you don’t know what that woman is!
...”



Apollon, who had already sat down to his work and put on his spectacles

again, at first glanced askance at the money without speaking or

putting down his needle; then, without paying the slightest attention

to me or making any answer, he went on busying himself with his needle,

which he had not yet threaded.
I waited before him for three minutes

with my arms crossed _à la Napoléon_.
My temples were moist with sweat.
I was pale, I felt it.
But, thank God, he must have been moved to pity,

looking at me.
Having threaded his needle he deliberately got up from

his seat, deliberately moved back his chair, deliberately took off his

spectacles, deliberately counted the money, and finally asking me over

his shoulder: “Shall I get a whole portion?” deliberately walked out of

the room.
As I was going back to Liza, the thought occurred to me on

the way: shouldn’t I run away just as I was in my dressing-gown, no

matter where, and then let happen what would?
I sat down again.
She looked at me uneasily.
For some minutes we were

silent.
“I will kill him,” I shouted suddenly, striking the table with my fist

so that the ink spurted out of the inkstand.
“What are you saying!” she cried, starting.
“I will kill him!
kill him!” I shrieked, suddenly striking the table in

absolute frenzy, and at the same time fully understanding how stupid it

was to be in such a frenzy.
“You don’t know, Liza, what that torturer

is to me.
He is my torturer....
He has gone now to fetch some rusks; he

...”



And suddenly I burst into tears.
It was an hysterical attack.
How

ashamed I felt in the midst of my sobs; but still I could not restrain

them.
She was frightened.
“What is the matter?
What is wrong?” she cried, fussing about me.
“Water, give me water, over there!” I muttered in a faint voice, though

I was inwardly conscious that I could have got on very well without

water and without muttering in a faint voice.
But I was, what is

called, _putting it on_, to save appearances, though the attack was a

genuine one.
She gave me water, looking at me in bewilderment.
At that moment

Apollon brought in the tea.
It suddenly seemed to me that this

commonplace, prosaic tea was horribly undignified and paltry after all

that had happened, and I blushed crimson.
Liza looked at Apollon with

positive alarm.
He went out without a glance at either of us.
“Liza, do you despise me?” I asked, looking at her fixedly, trembling

with impatience to know what she was thinking.
She was confused, and did not know what to answer.
“Drink your tea,” I said to her angrily.
I was angry with myself, but,

of course, it was she who would have to pay for it.
A horrible spite

against her suddenly surged up in my heart; I believe I could have

killed her.
To revenge myself on her I swore inwardly not to say a word

to her all the time.
“She is the cause of it all,” I thought.
Our silence lasted for five minutes.
The tea stood on the table; we did

not touch it.
I had got to the point of purposely refraining from

beginning in order to embarrass her further; it was awkward for her to

begin alone.
Several times she glanced at me with mournful perplexity.
I was obstinately silent.
I was, of course, myself the chief sufferer,

because I was fully conscious of the disgusting meanness of my spiteful

stupidity, and yet at the same time I could not restrain myself.
“I want to... get away ... from there altogether,” she began, to break

the silence in some way, but, poor girl, that was just what she ought

not to have spoken about at such a stupid moment to a man so stupid as

I was.
My heart positively ached with pity for her tactless and

unnecessary straightforwardness.
But something hideous at once stifled

all compassion in me; it even provoked me to greater venom.
I did not

care what happened.
Another five minutes passed.
“Perhaps I am in your way,” she began timidly, hardly audibly, and was

getting up.
But as soon as I saw this first impulse of wounded dignity I positively

trembled with spite, and at once burst out.
“Why have you come to me, tell me that, please?” I began, gasping for

breath and regardless of logical connection in my words.
I longed to

have it all out at once, at one burst; I did not even trouble how to

begin.
“Why have you come?
Answer, answer,” I cried, hardly knowing

what I was doing.
“I’ll tell you, my good girl, why you have come.
You’ve come because I talked sentimental stuff to you then.
So now you

are soft as butter and longing for fine sentiments again.
So you may as

well know that I was laughing at you then.
And I am laughing at you

now.
Why are you shuddering?
Yes, I was laughing at you!
I had been

insulted just before, at dinner, by the fellows who came that evening

before me.
I came to you, meaning to thrash one of them, an officer;

but I didn’t succeed, I didn’t find him; I had to avenge the insult on

someone to get back my own again; you turned up, I vented my spleen on

you and laughed at you.
I had been humiliated, so I wanted to

humiliate; I had been treated like a rag, so I wanted to show my

power.... That’s what it was, and you imagined I had come there on

purpose to save you.
Yes?
You imagined that?
You imagined that?”



I knew that she would perhaps be muddled and not take it all in

exactly, but I knew, too, that she would grasp the gist of it, very

well indeed.
And so, indeed, she did.
She turned white as a

handkerchief, tried to say something, and her lips worked painfully;

but she sank on a chair as though she had been felled by an axe.
And

all the time afterwards she listened to me with her lips parted and her

eyes wide open, shuddering with awful terror.
The cynicism, the

cynicism of my words overwhelmed her....



“Save you!” I went on, jumping up from my chair and running up and down

the room before her.
“Save you from what?
But perhaps I am worse than

you myself.
Why didn’t you throw it in my teeth when I was giving you

that sermon: ‘But what did you come here yourself for?
was it to read

us a sermon?’ Power, power was what I wanted then, sport was what I

wanted, I wanted to wring out your tears, your humiliation, your

hysteria—that was what I wanted then!
Of course, I couldn’t keep it up

then, because I am a wretched creature, I was frightened, and, the

devil knows why, gave you my address in my folly.
Afterwards, before I

got home, I was cursing and swearing at you because of that address, I

hated you already because of the lies I had told you.
Because I only

like playing with words, only dreaming, but, do you know, what I really

want is that you should all go to hell.
That is what I want.
I want

peace; yes, I’d sell the whole world for a farthing, straight off, so

long as I was left in peace.
Is the world to go to pot, or am I to go

without my tea?
I say that the world may go to pot for me so long as I

always get my tea.
Did you know that, or not?
Well, anyway, I know that

I am a blackguard, a scoundrel, an egoist, a sluggard.
Here I have been

shuddering for the last three days at the thought of your coming.
And

do you know what has worried me particularly for these three days?
That

I posed as such a hero to you, and now you would see me in a wretched

torn dressing-gown, beggarly, loathsome.
I told you just now that I was

not ashamed of my poverty; so you may as well know that I am ashamed of

it; I am more ashamed of it than of anything, more afraid of it than of

being found out if I were a thief, because I am as vain as though I had

been skinned and the very air blowing on me hurt.
Surely by now you

must realise that I shall never forgive you for having found me in this

wretched dressing-gown, just as I was flying at Apollon like a spiteful

cur.
The saviour, the former hero, was flying like a mangy, unkempt

sheep-dog at his lackey, and the lackey was jeering at him!
And I shall

never forgive you for the tears I could not help shedding before you

just now, like some silly woman put to shame!
And for what I am

confessing to you now, I shall never forgive you either!
Yes—you must

answer for it all because you turned up like this, because I am a

blackguard, because I am the nastiest, stupidest, absurdest and most

envious of all the worms on earth, who are not a bit better than I am,

but, the devil knows why, are never put to confusion; while I shall

always be insulted by every louse, that is my doom!
And what is it to

me that you don’t understand a word of this!
And what do I care, what

do I care about you, and whether you go to ruin there or not?
Do you

understand?
How I shall hate you now after saying this, for having been

here and listening.
Why, it’s not once in a lifetime a man speaks out

like this, and then it is in hysterics!
... What more do you want?
Why

do you still stand confronting me, after all this?
Why are you worrying

me?
Why don’t you go?”



But at this point a strange thing happened.
I was so accustomed to

think and imagine everything from books, and to picture everything in

the world to myself just as I had made it up in my dreams beforehand,

that I could not all at once take in this strange circumstance.
What

happened was this: Liza, insulted and crushed by me, understood a great

deal more than I imagined.
She understood from all this what a woman

understands first of all, if she feels genuine love, that is, that I

was myself unhappy.
The frightened and wounded expression on her face was followed first by

a look of sorrowful perplexity.
When I began calling myself a scoundrel

and a blackguard and my tears flowed (the tirade was accompanied

throughout by tears) her whole face worked convulsively.
She was on the

point of getting up and stopping me; when I finished she took no notice

of my shouting: “Why are you here, why don’t you go away?” but realised

only that it must have been very bitter to me to say all this.
Besides,

she was so crushed, poor girl; she considered herself infinitely

beneath me; how could she feel anger or resentment?
She suddenly leapt

up from her chair with an irresistible impulse and held out her hands,

yearning towards me, though still timid and not daring to stir.... At

this point there was a revulsion in my heart too.
Then she suddenly

rushed to me, threw her arms round me and burst into tears.
I, too,

could not restrain myself, and sobbed as I never had before.
“They won’t let me ...
I can’t be good!” I managed to articulate; then

I went to the sofa, fell on it face downwards, and sobbed on it for a

quarter of an hour in genuine hysterics.
She came close to me, put her

arms round me and stayed motionless in that position.
But the trouble

was that the hysterics could not go on for ever, and (I am writing the

loathsome truth) lying face downwards on the sofa with my face thrust

into my nasty leather pillow, I began by degrees to be aware of a

far-away, involuntary but irresistible feeling that it would be awkward

now for me to raise my head and look Liza straight in the face.
Why was

I ashamed?
I don’t know, but I was ashamed.
The thought, too, came into

my overwrought brain that our parts now were completely changed, that

she was now the heroine, while I was just a crushed and humiliated

creature as she had been before me that night—four days before.... And

all this came into my mind during the minutes I was lying on my face on

the sofa.
My God!
surely I was not envious of her then.
I don’t know, to this day I cannot decide, and at the time, of course,

I was still less able to understand what I was feeling than now.
I

cannot get on without domineering and tyrannising over someone, but ...

there is no explaining anything by reasoning and so it is useless to

reason.
I conquered myself, however, and raised my head; I had to do so sooner

or later ... and I am convinced to this day that it was just because I

was ashamed to look at her that another feeling was suddenly kindled

and flamed up in my heart ... a feeling of mastery and possession.
My

eyes gleamed with passion, and I gripped her hands tightly.
How I hated

her and how I was drawn to her at that minute!
The one feeling

intensified the other.
It was almost like an act of vengeance.
At first

there was a look of amazement, even of terror on her face, but only for

one instant.
She warmly and rapturously embraced me.
X





A quarter of an hour later I was rushing up and down the room in

frenzied impatience, from minute to minute I went up to the screen and

peeped through the crack at Liza.
She was sitting on the ground with

her head leaning against the bed, and must have been crying.
But she

did not go away, and that irritated me.
This time she understood it

all.
I had insulted her finally, but ... there’s no need to describe

it.
She realised that my outburst of passion had been simply revenge, a

fresh humiliation, and that to my earlier, almost causeless hatred was

added now a _personal hatred_, born of envy....
Though I do not

maintain positively that she understood all this distinctly; but she

certainly did fully understand that I was a despicable man, and what

was worse, incapable of loving her.
I know I shall be told that this is incredible—but it is incredible to

be as spiteful and stupid as I was; it may be added that it was strange

I should not love her, or at any rate, appreciate her love.
Why is it

strange?
In the first place, by then I was incapable of love, for I

repeat, with me loving meant tyrannising and showing my moral

superiority.
I have never in my life been able to imagine any other

sort of love, and have nowadays come to the point of sometimes thinking

that love really consists in the right—freely given by the beloved

object—to tyrannise over her.
Even in my underground dreams I did not imagine love except as a

struggle.
I began it always with hatred and ended it with moral

subjugation, and afterwards I never knew what to do with the subjugated

object.
And what is there to wonder at in that, since I had succeeded

in so corrupting myself, since I was so out of touch with “real life,”

as to have actually thought of reproaching her, and putting her to

shame for having come to me to hear “fine sentiments”; and did not even

guess that she had come not to hear fine sentiments, but to love me,

because to a woman all reformation, all salvation from any sort of

ruin, and all moral renewal is included in love and can only show

itself in that form.
I did not hate her so much, however, when I was running about the room

and peeping through the crack in the screen.
I was only insufferably

oppressed by her being here.
I wanted her to disappear.
I wanted

“peace,” to be left alone in my underground world.
Real life oppressed

me with its novelty so much that I could hardly breathe.
But several minutes passed and she still remained, without stirring, as

though she were unconscious.
I had the shamelessness to tap softly at

the screen as though to remind her.... She started, sprang up, and flew

to seek her kerchief, her hat, her coat, as though making her escape

from me.... Two minutes later she came from behind the screen and

looked with heavy eyes at me.
I gave a spiteful grin, which was forced,

however, to _keep up appearances_, and I turned away from her eyes.
“Good-bye,” she said, going towards the door.
I ran up to her, seized her hand, opened it, thrust something in it and

closed it again.
Then I turned at once and dashed away in haste to the

other corner of the room to avoid seeing, anyway....
I did mean a moment since to tell a lie—to write that I did this

accidentally, not knowing what I was doing through foolishness, through

losing my head.
But I don’t want to lie, and so I will say straight out

that I opened her hand and put the money in it ... from spite.
It came

into my head to do this while I was running up and down the room and

she was sitting behind the screen.
But this I can say for certain:

though I did that cruel thing purposely, it was not an impulse from the

heart, but came from my evil brain.
This cruelty was so affected, so

purposely made up, so completely a product of the brain, of books, that

I could not even keep it up a minute—first I dashed away to avoid

seeing her, and then in shame and despair rushed after Liza.
I opened

the door in the passage and began listening.
“Liza!
Liza!” I cried on the stairs, but in a low voice, not boldly.
There was no answer, but I fancied I heard her footsteps, lower down on

the stairs.
“Liza!” I cried, more loudly.
No answer.
But at that minute I heard the stiff outer glass door open

heavily with a creak and slam violently; the sound echoed up the

stairs.
She had gone.
I went back to my room in hesitation.
I felt horribly

oppressed.
I stood still at the table, beside the chair on which she had sat and

looked aimlessly before me.
A minute passed, suddenly I started;

straight before me on the table I saw....
In short, I saw a crumpled

blue five-rouble note, the one I had thrust into her hand a minute

before.
It was the same note; it could be no other, there was no other

in the flat.
So she had managed to fling it from her hand on the table

at the moment when I had dashed into the further corner.
Well!
I might have expected that she would do that.
Might I have

expected it?
No, I was such an egoist, I was so lacking in respect for

my fellow-creatures that I could not even imagine she would do so.
I

could not endure it.
A minute later I flew like a madman to dress,

flinging on what I could at random and ran headlong after her.
She

could not have got two hundred paces away when I ran out into the

street.
It was a still night and the snow was coming down in masses and falling

almost perpendicularly, covering the pavement and the empty street as

though with a pillow.
There was no one in the street, no sound was to

be heard.
The street lamps gave a disconsolate and useless glimmer.
I

ran two hundred paces to the cross-roads and stopped short.
Where had she gone?
And why was I running after her?
Why?
To fall down before her, to sob with remorse, to kiss her feet, to

entreat her forgiveness!
I longed for that, my whole breast was being

rent to pieces, and never, never shall I recall that minute with

indifference.
But—what for?
I thought.
Should I not begin to hate her,

perhaps, even tomorrow, just because I had kissed her feet today?
Should I give her happiness?
Had I not recognised that day, for the

hundredth time, what I was worth?
Should I not torture her?
I stood in the snow, gazing into the troubled darkness and pondered

this.
“And will it not be better?” I mused fantastically, afterwards at home,

stifling the living pang of my heart with fantastic dreams.
“Will it

not be better that she should keep the resentment of the insult for

ever?
Resentment—why, it is purification; it is a most stinging and

painful consciousness!
Tomorrow I should have defiled her soul and have

exhausted her heart, while now the feeling of insult will never die in

her heart, and however loathsome the filth awaiting her—the feeling of

insult will elevate and purify her ... by hatred ... h’m!
... perhaps,

too, by forgiveness.... Will all that make things easier for her

though?
...”



And, indeed, I will ask on my own account here, an idle question: which

is better—cheap happiness or exalted sufferings?
Well, which is better?
So I dreamed as I sat at home that evening, almost dead with the pain

in my soul.
Never had I endured such suffering and remorse, yet could

there have been the faintest doubt when I ran out from my lodging that

I should turn back half-way?
I never met Liza again and I have heard

nothing of her.
I will add, too, that I remained for a long time

afterwards pleased with the phrase about the benefit from resentment

and hatred in spite of the fact that I almost fell ill from misery.
Even now, so many years later, all this is somehow a very evil memory.
I have many evil memories now, but ... hadn’t I better end my “Notes”

here?
I believe I made a mistake in beginning to write them, anyway I

have felt ashamed all the time I’ve been writing this story; so it’s

hardly literature so much as a corrective punishment.
Why, to tell long

stories, showing how I have spoiled my life through morally rotting in

my corner, through lack of fitting environment, through divorce from

real life, and rankling spite in my underground world, would certainly

not be interesting; a novel needs a hero, and all the traits for an

anti-hero are _expressly_ gathered together here, and what matters

most, it all produces an unpleasant impression, for we are all divorced

from life, we are all cripples, every one of us, more or less.
We are

so divorced from it that we feel at once a sort of loathing for real

life, and so cannot bear to be reminded of it.
Why, we have come almost

to looking upon real life as an effort, almost as hard work, and we are

all privately agreed that it is better in books.
And why do we fuss and

fume sometimes?
Why are we perverse and ask for something else?
We

don’t know what ourselves.
It would be the worse for us if our petulant

prayers were answered.
Come, try, give any one of us, for instance, a

little more independence, untie our hands, widen the spheres of our

activity, relax the control and we ... yes, I assure you ... we should

be begging to be under control again at once.
I know that you will very

likely be angry with me for that, and will begin shouting and stamping.
Speak for yourself, you will say, and for your miseries in your

underground holes, and don’t dare to say all of us—excuse me,

gentlemen, I am not justifying myself with that “all of us.” As for

what concerns me in particular I have only in my life carried to an

extreme what you have not dared to carry halfway, and what’s more, you

have taken your cowardice for good sense, and have found comfort in

deceiving yourselves.
So that perhaps, after all, there is more life in

me than in you.
Look into it more carefully!
Why, we don’t even know

what living means now, what it is, and what it is called?
Leave us

alone without books and we shall be lost and in confusion at once.
We

shall not know what to join on to, what to cling to, what to love and

what to hate, what to respect and what to despise.
We are oppressed at

being men—men with a real individual body and blood, we are ashamed of

it, we think it a disgrace and try to contrive to be some sort of

impossible generalised man.
We are stillborn, and for generations past

have been begotten, not by living fathers, and that suits us better and

better.
We are developing a taste for it.
Soon we shall contrive to be

born somehow from an idea.
But enough; I don’t want to write more from

“Underground.”



[The notes of this paradoxalist do not end here, however.
He could not

refrain from going on with them, but it seems to us that we may stop

here.]
Produced by Martin Adamson











POOR FOLK



By Fyodor Dostoyevsky



Translated by C. J. Hogarth









April 8th



MY DEAREST BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--How happy I was last night--how

immeasurably, how impossibly happy!
That was because for once in your

life you had relented so far as to obey my wishes.
At about eight

o’clock I awoke from sleep (you know, my beloved one, that I always like

to sleep for a short hour after my work is done)--I awoke, I say, and,

lighting a candle, prepared my paper to write, and trimmed my pen.
Then

suddenly, for some reason or another, I raised my eyes--and felt my

very heart leap within me!
For you had understood what I wanted, you had

understood what my heart was craving for.
Yes, I perceived that a corner

of the curtain in your window had been looped up and fastened to the

cornice as I had suggested should be done; and it seemed to me that your

dear face was glimmering at the window, and that you were looking at me

from out of the darkness of your room, and that you were thinking of

me.
Yet how vexed I felt that I could not distinguish your sweet face

clearly!
For there was a time when you and I could see one another

without any difficulty at all.
Ah me, but old age is not always a

blessing, my beloved one!
At this very moment everything is standing

awry to my eyes, for a man needs only to work late overnight in his

writing of something or other for, in the morning, his eyes to be red,

and the tears to be gushing from them in a way that makes him ashamed to

be seen before strangers.
However, I was able to picture to myself your

beaming smile, my angel--your kind, bright smile; and in my heart there

lurked just such a feeling as on the occasion when I first kissed you,

my little Barbara.
Do you remember that, my darling?
Yet somehow you

seemed to be threatening me with your tiny finger.
Was it so, little

wanton?
You must write and tell me about it in your next letter.
But what think you of the plan of the curtain, Barbara?
It is a charming

one, is it not?
No matter whether I be at work, or about to retire to

rest, or just awaking from sleep, it enables me to know that you are

thinking of me, and remembering me--that you are both well and happy.
Then when you lower the curtain, it means that it is time that I, Makar

Alexievitch, should go to bed; and when again you raise the curtain, it

means that you are saying to me, “Good morning,” and asking me how I am,

and whether I have slept well.
“As for myself,” adds the curtain, “I am

altogether in good health and spirits, glory be to God!” Yes, my heart’s

delight, you see how easy a plan it was to devise, and how much writing

it will save us!
It is a clever plan, is it not?
And it was my own

invention, too!
Am I not cunning in such matters, Barbara Alexievna?
Well, next let me tell you, dearest, that last night I slept better

and more soundly than I had ever hoped to do, and that I am the more

delighted at the fact in that, as you know, I had just settled into a

new lodging--a circumstance only too apt to keep one from sleeping!
This

morning, too, I arose (joyous and full of love) at cockcrow.
How good

seemed everything at that hour, my darling!
When I opened my window I

could see the sun shining, and hear the birds singing, and smell the air

laden with scents of spring.
In short, all nature was awaking to life

again.
Everything was in consonance with my mood; everything seemed fair

and spring-like.
Moreover, I had a fancy that I should fare well today.
But my whole thoughts were bent upon you.
“Surely,” thought I, “we

mortals who dwell in pain and sorrow might with reason envy the birds

of heaven which know not either!” And my other thoughts were similar

to these.
In short, I gave myself up to fantastic comparisons.
A little

book which I have says the same kind of thing in a variety of ways.
For

instance, it says that one may have many, many fancies, my Barbara--that

as soon as the spring comes on, one’s thoughts become uniformly pleasant

and sportive and witty, for the reason that, at that season, the mind

inclines readily to tenderness, and the world takes on a more roseate

hue.
From that little book of mine I have culled the following passage,

and written it down for you to see.
In particular does the author

express a longing similar to my own, where he writes:



“Why am I not a bird free to seek its quest?”



And he has written much else, God bless him!
But tell me, my love--where did you go for your walk this morning?
Even

before I had started for the office you had taken flight from your room,

and passed through the courtyard--yes, looking as vernal-like as a

bird in spring.
What rapture it gave me to see you!
Ah, little Barbara,

little Barbara, you must never give way to grief, for tears are of no

avail, nor sorrow.
I know this well--I know it of my own experience.
So

do you rest quietly until you have regained your health a little.
But

how is our good Thedora?
What a kind heart she has!
You write that she

is now living with you, and that you are satisfied with what she does.
True, you say that she is inclined to grumble, but do not mind that,

Barbara.
God bless her, for she is an excellent soul!
But what sort of an abode have I lighted upon, Barbara Alexievna?
What

sort of a tenement, do you think, is this?
Formerly, as you know, I used

to live in absolute stillness--so much so that if a fly took wing

it could plainly be heard buzzing.
Here, however, all is turmoil and

shouting and clatter.
The PLAN of the tenement you know already.
Imagine

a long corridor, quite dark, and by no means clean.
To the right a dead

wall, and to the left a row of doors stretching as far as the line of

rooms extends.
These rooms are tenanted by different people--by one,

by two, or by three lodgers as the case may be, but in this arrangement

there is no sort of system, and the place is a perfect Noah’s Ark.
Most

of the lodgers are respectable, educated, and even bookish people.
In

particular they include a tchinovnik (one of the literary staff in some

government department), who is so well-read that he can expound Homer or

any other author--in fact, ANYTHING, such a man of talent is he!
Also,

there are a couple of officers (for ever playing cards), a midshipman,

and an English tutor.
But, to amuse you, dearest, let me describe these

people more categorically in my next letter, and tell you in detail

about their lives.
As for our landlady, she is a dirty little old woman

who always walks about in a dressing-gown and slippers, and never ceases

to shout at Theresa.
I myself live in the kitchen--or, rather, in a

small room which forms part of the kitchen.
The latter is a very large,

bright, clean, cheerful apartment with three windows in it, and a

partition-wall which, running outwards from the front wall, makes a sort

of little den, a sort of extra room, for myself.
Everything in this den

is comfortable and convenient, and I have, as I say, a window to myself.
So much for a description of my dwelling-place.
Do not think, dearest,

that in all this there is any hidden intention.
The fact that I live in

the kitchen merely means that I live behind the partition wall in that

apartment--that I live quite alone, and spend my time in a quiet fashion

compounded of trifles.
For furniture I have provided myself with a

bed, a table, a chest of drawers, and two small chairs.
Also, I have

suspended an ikon.
True, better rooms MAY exist in the world than

this--much better rooms; yet COMFORT is the chief thing.
In fact, I

have made all my arrangements for comfort’s sake alone; so do not for a

moment imagine that I had any other end in view.
And since your window

happens to be just opposite to mine, and since the courtyard between us

is narrow and I can see you as you pass,--why, the result is that this

miserable wretch will be able to live at once more happily and with less

outlay.
The dearest room in this house costs, with board, thirty-five

roubles--more than my purse could well afford; whereas MY room costs

only twenty-four, though formerly I used to pay thirty, and so had to

deny myself many things (I could drink tea but seldom, and never could

indulge in tea and sugar as I do now).
But, somehow, I do not like

having to go without tea, for everyone else here is respectable, and the

fact makes me ashamed.
After all, one drinks tea largely to please one’s

fellow men, Barbara, and to give oneself tone and an air of gentility

(though, of myself, I care little about such things, for I am not a

man of the finicking sort).
Yet think you that, when all things

needful--boots and the rest--have been paid for, much will remain?
Yet I

ought not to grumble at my salary,--I am quite satisfied with it; it is

sufficient.
It has sufficed me now for some years, and, in addition, I

receive certain gratuities.
Well good-bye, my darling.
I have bought you two little pots of

geraniums--quite cheap little pots, too--as a present.
Perhaps you would

also like some mignonette?
Mignonette it shall be if only you will write

to inform me of everything in detail.
Also, do not misunderstand the

fact that I have taken this room, my dearest.
Convenience and nothing

else, has made me do so.
The snugness of the place has caught my fancy.
Also, I shall be able to save money here, and to hoard it against the

future.
Already I have saved a little money as a beginning.
Nor must

you despise me because I am such an insignificant old fellow that a fly

could break me with its wing.
True, I am not a swashbuckler; but perhaps

there may also abide in me the spirit which should pertain to every man

who is at once resigned and sure of himself.
Good-bye, then, again, my

angel.
I have now covered close upon a whole two sheets of notepaper,

though I ought long ago to have been starting for the office.
I kiss

your hands, and remain ever your devoted slave, your faithful friend,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
P.S.--One thing I beg of you above all things--and that is, that you

will answer this letter as FULLY as possible.
With the letter I send you

a packet of bonbons.
Eat them for your health’s sake, nor, for the love

of God, feel any uneasiness about me.
Once more, dearest one, good-bye.
April 8th



MY BELOVED MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--Do you know, I must quarrel with you.
Yes,

good Makar Alexievitch, I really cannot accept your presents, for I know

what they must have cost you--I know to what privations and self-denial

they must have led.
How many times have I not told you that I stand in

need of NOTHING, of absolutely NOTHING, as well as that I shall never be

in a position to recompense you for all the kindly acts with which you

have loaded me?
Why, for instance, have you sent me geraniums?
A little

sprig of balsam would not have mattered so much--but geraniums!
Only

have I to let fall an unguarded word--for example, about geraniums--and

at once you buy me some!
How much they must have cost you!
Yet what a

charm there is in them, with their flaming petals!
Wherever did you

get these beautiful plants?
I have set them in my window as the most

conspicuous place possible, while on the floor I have placed a bench

for my other flowers to stand on (since you are good enough to enrich me

with such presents).
Unfortunately, Thedora, who, with her sweeping and

polishing, makes a perfect sanctuary of my room, is not over-pleased

at the arrangement.
But why have you sent me also bonbons?
Your letter

tells me that something special is afoot with you, for I find in it so

much about paradise and spring and sweet odours and the songs of birds.
Surely, thought I to myself when I received it, this is as good as

poetry!
Indeed, verses are the only thing that your letter lacks,

Makar Alexievitch.
And what tender feelings I can read in it--what

roseate-coloured fancies!
To the curtain, however, I had never given a

thought.
The fact is that when I moved the flower-pots, it LOOPED ITSELF

up.
There now!
Ah, Makar Alexievitch, you neither speak of nor give any account of what

you have spent upon me.
You hope thereby to deceive me, to make it

seem as though the cost always falls upon you alone, and that there

is nothing to conceal.
Yet I KNOW that for my sake you deny yourself

necessaries.
For instance, what has made you go and take the room which

you have done, where you will be worried and disturbed, and where you

have neither elbow-space nor comfort--you who love solitude, and never

like to have any one near you?
To judge from your salary, I should think

that you might well live in greater ease than that.
Also, Thedora tells

me that your circumstances used to be much more affluent than they are

at present.
Do you wish, then, to persuade me that your whole existence

has been passed in loneliness and want and gloom, with never a cheering

word to help you, nor a seat in a friend’s chimney-corner?
Ah, kind

comrade, how my heart aches for you!
But do not overtask your health,

Makar Alexievitch.
For instance, you say that your eyes are over-weak

for you to go on writing in your office by candle-light.
Then why do so?
I am sure that your official superiors do not need to be convinced of

your diligence!
Once more I implore you not to waste so much money upon me.
I know

how much you love me, but I also know that you are not rich....
This

morning I too rose in good spirits.
Thedora had long been at work; and

it was time that I too should bestir myself.
Indeed I was yearning to

do so, so I went out for some silk, and then sat down to my labours.
All

the morning I felt light-hearted and cheerful.
Yet now my thoughts are

once more dark and sad--once more my heart is ready to sink.
Ah, what is going to become of me?
What will be my fate?
To have to be

so uncertain as to the future, to have to be unable to foretell what is

going to happen, distresses me deeply.
Even to look back at the past

is horrible, for it contains sorrow that breaks my very heart at the

thought of it.
Yes, a whole century in tears could I spend because of

the wicked people who have wrecked my life!
But dusk is coming on, and I must set to work again.
Much else should I

have liked to write to you, but time is lacking, and I must hasten.
Of

course, to write this letter is a pleasure enough, and could never be

wearisome; but why do you not come to see me in person?
Why do you not,

Makar Alexievitch?
You live so close to me, and at least SOME of your

time is your own.
I pray you, come.
I have just seen Theresa.
She was

looking so ill, and I felt so sorry for her, that I gave her twenty

kopecks.
I am almost falling asleep.
Write to me in fullest detail, both

concerning your mode of life, and concerning the people who live with

you, and concerning how you fare with them.
I should so like to know!
Yes, you must write again.
Tonight I have purposely looped the curtain

up.
Go to bed early, for, last night, I saw your candle burning until

nearly midnight.
Goodbye!
I am now feeling sad and weary.
Ah that

I should have to spend such days as this one has been.
Again

good-bye.--Your friend,



BARBARA DOBROSELOVA.
April 8th



MY DEAREST BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--To think that a day like this should have

fallen to my miserable lot!
Surely you are making fun of an old man?...
However, it was my own fault--my own fault entirely.
One ought not to

grow old holding a lock of Cupid’s hair in one’s hand.
Naturally one is

misunderstood....
Yet man is sometimes a very strange being.
By all the

Saints, he will talk of doing things, yet leave them undone, and remain

looking the kind of fool from whom may the Lord preserve us!...
Nay, I

am not angry, my beloved; I am only vexed to think that I should have

written to you in such stupid, flowery phraseology.
Today I went hopping

and skipping to the office, for my heart was under your influence, and

my soul was keeping holiday, as it were.
Yes, everything seemed to

be going well with me.
Then I betook myself to my work.
But with what

result?
I gazed around at the old familiar objects, at the old familiar

grey and gloomy objects.
They looked just the same as before.
Yet

WERE those the same inkstains, the same tables and chairs, that I had

hitherto known?
Yes, they WERE the same, exactly the same; so why should

I have gone off riding on Pegasus’ back?
Whence had that mood arisen?
It had arisen from the fact that a certain sun had beamed upon me, and

turned the sky to blue.
But why so?
Why is it, sometimes, that sweet

odours seem to be blowing through a courtyard where nothing of the sort

can be?
They must be born of my foolish fancy, for a man may stray so

far into sentiment as to forget his immediate surroundings, and to give

way to the superfluity of fond ardour with which his heart is charged.
On the other hand, as I walked home from the office at nightfall my feet

seemed to lag, and my head to be aching.
Also, a cold wind seemed to be

blowing down my back (enraptured with the spring, I had gone out clad

only in a thin overcoat).
Yet you have misunderstood my sentiments,

dearest.
They are altogether different to what you suppose.
It is a

purely paternal feeling that I have for you.
I stand towards you in

the position of a relative who is bound to watch over your lonely

orphanhood.
This I say in all sincerity, and with a single purpose,

as any kinsman might do.
For, after all, I AM a distant kinsman of

yours--the seventh drop of water in the pudding, as the proverb has

it--yet still a kinsman, and at the present time your nearest relative

and protector, seeing that where you had the right to look for help and

protection, you found only treachery and insult.
As for poetry, I may

say that I consider it unbecoming for a man of my years to devote his

faculties to the making of verses.
Poetry is rubbish.
Even boys at

school ought to be whipped for writing it.
Why do you write thus about “comfort” and “peace” and the rest?
I am

not a fastidious man, nor one who requires much.
Never in my life have I

been so comfortable as now.
Why, then, should I complain in my old age?
I have enough to eat, I am well dressed and booted.
Also, I have my

diversions.
You see, I am not of noble blood.
My father himself was not

a gentleman; he and his family had to live even more plainly than I do.
Nor am I a milksop.
Nevertheless, to speak frankly, I do not like my

present abode so much as I used to like my old one.
Somehow the latter

seemed more cosy, dearest.
Of course, this room is a good one enough;

in fact, in SOME respects it is the more cheerful and interesting of the

two.
I have nothing to say against it--no.
Yet I miss the room that used

to be so familiar to me.
Old lodgers like myself soon grow as attached

to our chattels as to a kinsman.
My old room was such a snug little

place!
True, its walls resembled those of any other room--I am not

speaking of that; the point is that the recollection of them seems to

haunt my mind with sadness.
Curious that recollections should be so

mournful!
Even what in that room used to vex me and inconvenience me now

looms in a purified light, and figures in my imagination as a thing to

be desired.
We used to live there so quietly--I and an old landlady

who is now dead.
How my heart aches to remember her, for she was a good

woman, and never overcharged for her rooms.
Her whole time was spent in

making patchwork quilts with knitting-needles that were an arshin [An

ell.]
long.
Oftentimes we shared the same candle and board.
Also she had

a granddaughter, Masha--a girl who was then a mere baby, but must now be

a girl of thirteen.
This little piece of mischief, how she used to make

us laugh the day long!
We lived together, a happy family of three.
Often

of a long winter’s evening we would first have tea at the big round

table, and then betake ourselves to our work; the while that, to amuse

the child and to keep her out of mischief, the old lady would set

herself to tell stories.
What stories they were!--though stories less

suitable for a child than for a grown-up, educated person.
My word!
Why,

I myself have sat listening to them, as I smoked my pipe, until I have

forgotten about work altogether.
And then, as the story grew grimmer,

the little child, our little bag of mischief, would grow thoughtful in

proportion, and clasp her rosy cheeks in her tiny hands, and, hiding her

face, press closer to the old landlady.
Ah, how I loved to see her at

those moments!
As one gazed at her one would fail to notice how the

candle was flickering, or how the storm was swishing the snow about the

courtyard.
Yes, that was a goodly life, my Barbara, and we lived it

for nearly twenty years.... How my tongue does carry me away!
Maybe

the subject does not interest you, and I myself find it a not

over-easy subject to recall--especially at the present time.
Darkness is falling, and Theresa is busying herself with something or

another.
My head and my back are aching, and even my thoughts seem to

be in pain, so strangely do they occur.
Yes, my heart is sad today,

Barbara.... What is it you have written to me?
“Why do you not come

in PERSON to see me?” Dear one, what would people say?
I should have

but to cross the courtyard for people to begin noticing us, and asking

themselves questions.
Gossip and scandal would arise, and there would be

read into the affair quite another meaning than the real one.
No, little

angel, it were better that I should see you tomorrow at Vespers.
That

will be the better plan, and less hurtful to us both.
Nor must you chide

me, beloved, because I have written you a letter like this (reading it

through, I see it to be all odds and ends); for I am an old man now,

dear Barbara, and an uneducated one.
Little learning had I in my youth,

and things refuse to fix themselves in my brain when I try to learn

them anew.
No, I am not skilled in letter-writing, Barbara, and, without

being told so, or any one laughing at me for it, I know that, whenever

I try to describe anything with more than ordinary distinctness, I fall

into the mistake of talking sheer rubbish....
I saw you at your window

today--yes, I saw you as you were drawing down the blind!
Good-bye,

goodbye, little Barbara, and may God keep you!
Good-bye, my own Barbara

Alexievna!--Your sincere friend,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
P.S.--Do not think that I could write to you in a satirical vein, for I

am too old to show my teeth to no purpose, and people would laugh at me,

and quote our Russian proverb: “Who diggeth a pit for another one, the

same shall fall into it himself.”









April 9th



MY DEAREST MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--Are not you, my friend and benefactor,

just a little ashamed to repine and give way to such despondency?
And

surely you are not offended with me?
Ah!
Though often thoughtless in my

speech, I never should have imagined that you would take my words as

a jest at your expense.
Rest assured that NEVER should I make sport of

your years or of your character.
Only my own levity is at fault; still

more, the fact that I am so weary of life.
What will such a feeling not engender?
To tell you the truth, I had

supposed that YOU were jesting in your letter; wherefore, my heart was

feeling heavy at the thought that you could feel so displeased with

me.
Kind comrade and helper, you will be doing me an injustice if for

a single moment you ever suspect that I am lacking in feeling or in

gratitude towards you.
My heart, believe me, is able to appraise at

its true worth all that you have done for me by protecting me from my

enemies, and from hatred and persecution.
Never shall I cease to pray

to God for you; and, should my prayers ever reach Him and be received of

Heaven, then assuredly fortune will smile upon you!
Today I am not well.
By turns I shiver and flush with heat, and Thedora

is greatly disturbed about me.... Do not scruple to come and see me,

Makar Alexievitch.
How can it concern other people what you do?
You and

I are well enough acquainted with each other, and one’s own affairs are

one’s own affairs.
Goodbye, Makar Alexievitch, for I have come to the

end of all I had to say, and am feeling too unwell to write more.
Again

I beg of you not to be angry with me, but to rest assured of my constant

respect and attachment.--Your humble, devoted servant,



BARBARA DOBROSELOVA.
April 12th



DEAREST MISTRESS BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--I pray you, my beloved, to tell

me what ails you.
Every one of your letters fills me with alarm.
On the

other hand, in every letter I urge you to be more careful of yourself,

and to wrap up yourself warmly, and to avoid going out in bad weather,

and to be in all things prudent.
Yet you go and disobey me!
Ah, little

angel, you are a perfect child!
I know well that you are as weak as a

blade of grass, and that, no matter what wind blows upon you, you are

ready to fade.
But you must be careful of yourself, dearest; you MUST

look after yourself better; you MUST avoid all risks, lest you plunge

your friends into desolation and despair.
Dearest, you also express a wish to learn the details of my daily life

and surroundings.
That wish I hasten to satisfy.
Let me begin at

the beginning, since, by doing so, I shall explain things more

systematically.
In the first place, on entering this house, one passes

into a very bare hall, and thence along a passage to a mean staircase.
The reception room, however, is bright, clean, and spacious, and is

lined with redwood and metal-work.
But the scullery you would not care

to see; it is greasy, dirty, and odoriferous, while the stairs are in

rags, and the walls so covered with filth that the hand sticks fast

wherever it touches them.
Also, on each landing there is a medley of

boxes, chairs, and dilapidated wardrobes; while the windows have had

most of their panes shattered, and everywhere stand washtubs filled with

dirt, litter, eggshells, and fish-bladders.
The smell is abominable.
In

short, the house is not a nice one.
As to the disposition of the rooms, I have described it to you

already.
True, they are convenient enough, yet every one of them has an

ATMOSPHERE.
I do not mean that they smell badly so much as that each of

them seems to contain something which gives forth a rank, sickly-sweet

odour.
At first the impression is an unpleasant one, but a couple of

minutes will suffice to dissipate it, for the reason that EVERYTHING

here smells--people’s clothes, hands, and everything else--and one grows

accustomed to the rankness.
Canaries, however, soon die in this house.
A

naval officer here has just bought his fifth.
Birds cannot live long

in such an air.
Every morning, when fish or beef is being cooked, and

washing and scrubbing are in progress, the house is filled with steam.
Always, too, the kitchen is full of linen hanging out to dry; and since

my room adjoins that apartment, the smell from the clothes causes me not

a little annoyance.
However, one can grow used to anything.
From earliest dawn the house is astir as its inmates rise, walk about,

and stamp their feet.
That is to say, everyone who has to go to work

then gets out of bed.
First of all, tea is partaken of.
Most of the

tea-urns belong to the landlady; and since there are not very many of

them, we have to wait our turn.
Anyone who fails to do so will find

his teapot emptied and put away.
On the first occasion, that was what

happened to myself.
Well, is there anything else to tell you?
Already I

have made the acquaintance of the company here.
The naval officer took

the initiative in calling upon me, and his frankness was such that he

told me all about his father, his mother, his sister (who is married to

a lawyer of Tula), and the town of Kronstadt.
Also, he promised me

his patronage, and asked me to come and take tea with him.
I kept the

appointment in a room where card-playing is continually in progress;

and, after tea had been drunk, efforts were made to induce me to gamble.
Whether or not my refusal seemed to the company ridiculous I cannot

say, but at all events my companions played the whole evening, and were

playing when I left.
The dust and smoke in the room made my eyes ache.
I declined, as I say, to play cards, and was, therefore, requested to

discourse on philosophy, after which no one spoke to me at all--a result

which I did not regret.
In fact, I have no intention of going there

again, since every one is for gambling, and for nothing but gambling.
Even the literary tchinovnik gives such parties in his room--though, in

his case, everything is done delicately and with a certain refinement,

so that the thing has something of a retiring and innocent air.
In passing, I may tell you that our landlady is NOT a nice woman.
In

fact, she is a regular beldame.
You have seen her once, so what do you

think of her?
She is as lanky as a plucked chicken in consumption,

and, with Phaldoni (her servant), constitutes the entire staff of the

establishment.
Whether or not Phaldoni has any other name I do not know,

but at least he answers to this one, and every one calls him by it.
A red-haired, swine-jowled, snub-nosed, crooked lout, he is for ever

wrangling with Theresa, until the pair nearly come to blows.
In short,

life is not overly pleasant in this place.
Never at any time is the

household wholly at rest, for always there are people sitting up to

play cards.
Sometimes, too, certain things are done of which it would

be shameful for me to speak.
In particular, hardened though I am, it

astonishes me that men WITH FAMILIES should care to live in this Sodom.
For example, there is a family of poor folk who have rented from the

landlady a room which does not adjoin the other rooms, but is set apart

in a corner by itself.
Yet what quiet people they are!
Not a sound is

to be heard from them.
The father--he is called Gorshkov--is a little

grey-headed tchinovnik who, seven years ago, was dismissed from public

service, and now walks about in a coat so dirty and ragged that it hurts

one to see it.
Indeed it is a worse coat even than mine!
Also, he is

so thin and frail (at times I meet him in the corridor) that his knees

quake under him, his hands and head are tremulous with some disease

(God only knows what!
), and he so fears and distrusts everybody that he

always walks alone.
Reserved though I myself am, he is even worse.
As

for his family, it consists of a wife and three children.
The eldest of

the latter--a boy--is as frail as his father, while the mother--a woman

who, formerly, must have been good looking, and still has a striking

aspect in spite of her pallor--goes about in the sorriest of rags.
Also

I have heard that they are in debt to our landlady, as well as that she

is not overly kind to them.
Moreover, I have heard that Gorshkov lost

his post through some unpleasantness or other--through a legal suit

or process of which I could not exactly tell you the nature.
Yes, they

certainly are poor--Oh, my God, how poor!
At the same time, never a

sound comes from their room.
It is as though not a soul were living in

it.
Never does one hear even the children--which is an unusual thing,

seeing that children are ever ready to sport and play, and if they fail

to do so it is a bad sign.
One evening when I chanced to be passing the

door of their room, and all was quiet in the house, I heard through the

door a sob, and then a whisper, and then another sob, as though somebody

within were weeping, and with such subdued bitterness that it tore my

heart to hear the sound.
In fact, the thought of these poor people never

left me all night, and quite prevented me from sleeping.
Well, good-bye, my little Barbara, my little friend beyond price.
I have

described to you everything to the best of my ability.
All today you

have been in my thoughts; all today my heart has been yearning for you.
I happen to know, dearest one, that you lack a warm cloak.
To me too,

these St. Petersburg springs, with their winds and their snow showers,

spell death.
Good heavens, how the breezes bite one!
Do not be angry,

beloved, that I should write like this.
Style I have not.
Would that

I had!
I write just what wanders into my brain, in the hope that I may

cheer you up a little.
Of course, had I had a good education, things

might have been different; but, as things were, I could not have

one.
Never did I learn even to do simple sums!--Your faithful and

unchangeable friend,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
April 25th



MY DEAREST MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--Today I met my cousin Sasha.
To see her

going to wrack and ruin shocked me terribly.
Moreover, it has reached

me, through a side wind, that she has been making inquiry for me, and

dogging my footsteps, under the pretext that she wishes to pardon me, to

forget the past, and to renew our acquaintance.
Well, among other things

she told me that, whereas you are not a kinsman of mine, that she is my

nearest relative; that you have no right whatever to enter into family

relations with us; and that it is wrong and shameful for me to be

living upon your earnings and charity.
Also, she said that I must have

forgotten all that she did for me, though thereby she saved both myself

and my mother from starvation, and gave us food and drink; that for two

and a half years we caused her great loss; and, above all things, that

she excused us what we owed her.
Even my poor mother she did not spare.
Would that she, my dead parent, could know how I am being treated!
But God knows all about it.... Also, Anna declared that it was solely

through my own fault that my fortunes declined after she had bettered

them; that she is in no way responsible for what then happened; and that

I have but myself to blame for having been either unable or unwilling to

defend my honour.
Great God!
WHO, then, has been at fault?
According to

Anna, Hospodin [Mr.] Bwikov was only right when he declined to marry

a woman who--But need I say it?
It is cruel to hear such lies as hers.
What is to become of me I do not know.
I tremble and sob and weep.
Indeed, even to write this letter has cost me two hours.
At least it

might have been thought that Anna would have confessed HER share in the

past.
Yet see what she says!...
For the love of God do not be anxious

about me, my friend, my only benefactor.
Thedora is over apt to

exaggerate matters.
I am not REALLY ill.
I have merely caught a little

cold.
I caught it last night while I was walking to Bolkovo, to hear

Mass sung for my mother.
Ah, mother, my poor mother!
Could you but rise

from the grave and learn what is being done to your daughter!
B. D.









May 20th



MY DEAREST LITTLE BARBARA,--I am sending you a few grapes, which are

good for a convalescent person, and strongly recommended by doctors for

the allayment of fever.
Also, you were saying the other day that you

would like some roses; wherefore, I now send you a bunch.
Are you at all

able to eat, my darling?--for that is the chief point which ought to

be seen to.
Let us thank God that the past and all its unhappiness are

gone!
Yes, let us give thanks to Heaven for that much!
As for books, I

cannot get hold of any, except for a book which, written in excellent

style, is, I believe, to be had here.
At all events, people keep

praising it very much, and I have begged the loan of it for myself.
Should you too like to read it?
In this respect, indeed, I feel nervous,

for the reason that it is so difficult to divine what your taste in

books may be, despite my knowledge of your character.
Probably you would

like poetry--the poetry of sentiment and of love making?
Well, I will

send you a book of MY OWN poems.
Already I have copied out part of the

manuscript.
Everything with me is going well; so pray do not be anxious on my

account, beloved.
What Thedora told you about me was sheer rubbish.
Tell

her from me that she has not been speaking the truth.
Yes, do not fail

to give this mischief-maker my message.
It is not the case that I have

gone and sold a new uniform.
Why should I do so, seeing that I have

forty roubles of salary still to come to me?
Do not be uneasy, my

darling.
Thedora is a vindictive woman--merely a vindictive woman.
We

shall yet see better days.
Only do you get well, my angel--only do you

get well, for the love of God, lest you grieve an old man.
Also, who

told you that I was looking thin?
Slanders again--nothing but slanders!
I am as healthy as could be, and have grown so fat that I am ashamed

to be so sleek of paunch.
Would that you were equally healthy!...
Now

goodbye, my angel.
I kiss every one of your tiny fingers, and remain

ever your constant friend,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
P.S.--But what is this, dearest one, that you have written to me?
Why do

you place me upon such a pedestal?
Moreover, how could I come and visit

you frequently?
How, I repeat?
Of course, I might avail myself of the

cover of night; but, alas!
the season of the year is what it is, and

includes no night time to speak of.
In fact, although, throughout your

illness and delirium, I scarcely left your side for a moment, I cannot

think how I contrived to do the many things that I did.
Later, I ceased

to visit you at all, for the reason that people were beginning to notice

things, and to ask me questions.
Yet, even so, a scandal has arisen.
Theresa I trust thoroughly, for she is not a talkative woman; but

consider how it will be when the truth comes out in its entirety!
What

THEN will folk not say and think?
Nevertheless, be of good cheer, my

beloved, and regain your health.
When you have done so we will contrive

to arrange a rendezvous out of doors.
June 1st



MY BELOVED MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--So eager am I to do something that

will please and divert you in return for your care, for your ceaseless

efforts on my behalf--in short, for your love for me--that I have

decided to beguile a leisure hour for you by delving into my locker, and

extracting thence the manuscript which I send you herewith.
I began it

during the happier period of my life, and have continued it at intervals

since.
So often have you asked me about my former existence--about my

mother, about Pokrovski, about my sojourn with Anna Thedorovna, about my

more recent misfortunes; so often have you expressed an earnest desire

to read the manuscript in which (God knows why) I have recorded certain

incidents of my life, that I feel no doubt but that the sending of it

will give you sincere pleasure.
Yet somehow I feel depressed when I read

it, for I seem now to have grown twice as old as I was when I penned

its concluding lines.
Ah, Makar Alexievitch, how weary I am--how this

insomnia tortures me!
Convalescence is indeed a hard thing to bear!
B. D.



ONE



UP to the age of fourteen, when my father died, my childhood was the

happiest period of my life.
It began very far away from here in the

depths of the province of Tula, where my father filled the position of

steward on the vast estates of the Prince P----.
Our house was situated in

one of the Prince’s villages, and we lived a quiet, obscure, but happy,

life.
A gay little child was I--my one idea being ceaselessly to run

about the fields and the woods and the garden.
No one ever gave me a

thought, for my father was always occupied with business affairs, and

my mother with her housekeeping.
Nor did any one ever give me any

lessons--a circumstance for which I was not sorry.
At earliest dawn I

would hie me to a pond or a copse, or to a hay or a harvest field, where

the sun could warm me, and I could roam wherever I liked, and scratch my

hands with bushes, and tear my clothes in pieces.
For this I used to get

blamed afterwards, but I did not care.
Had it befallen me never to quit that village--had it befallen me to

remain for ever in that spot--I should always have been happy; but fate

ordained that I should leave my birthplace even before my girlhood had

come to an end.
In short, I was only twelve years old when we removed

to St. Petersburg.
Ah!
how it hurts me to recall the mournful gatherings

before our departure, and to recall how bitterly I wept when the time

came for us to say farewell to all that I had held so dear!
I remember

throwing myself upon my father’s neck, and beseeching him with tears

to stay in the country a little longer; but he bid me be silent, and

my mother, adding her tears to mine, explained that business matters

compelled us to go.
As a matter of fact, old Prince P---- had just died,

and his heirs had dismissed my father from his post; whereupon, since

he had a little money privately invested in St. Petersburg, he bethought

him that his personal presence in the capital was necessary for the

due management of his affairs.
It was my mother who told me this.
Consequently we settled here in St. Petersburg, and did not again move

until my father died.
How difficult I found it to grow accustomed to my new life!
At the time

of our removal to St. Petersburg it was autumn--a season when, in the

country, the weather is clear and keen and bright, all agricultural

labour has come to an end, the great sheaves of corn are safely garnered

in the byre, and the birds are flying hither and thither in clamorous

flocks.
Yes, at that season the country is joyous and fair, but here

in St. Petersburg, at the time when we reached the city, we encountered

nothing but rain, bitter autumn frosts, dull skies, ugliness, and crowds

of strangers who looked hostile, discontented, and disposed to take

offence.
However, we managed to settle down--though I remember that

in our new home there was much noise and confusion as we set the

establishment in order.
After this my father was seldom at home, and my

mother had few spare moments; wherefore, I found myself forgotten.
The first morning after our arrival, when I awoke from sleep, how sad I

felt!
I could see that our windows looked out upon a drab space of wall,

and that the street below was littered with filth.
Passers-by were few,

and as they walked they kept muffling themselves up against the cold.
Then there ensued days when dullness and depression reigned supreme.
Scarcely a relative or an acquaintance did we possess in St. Petersburg,

and even Anna Thedorovna and my father had come to loggerheads with one

another, owing to the fact that he owed her money.
In fact, our only

visitors were business callers, and as a rule these came but to wrangle,

to argue, and to raise a disturbance.
Such visits would make my father

look very discontented, and seem out of temper.
For hours and hours he

would pace the room with a frown on his face and a brooding silence on

his lips.
Even my mother did not dare address him at these times,

while, for my own part, I used to sit reading quietly and humbly in a

corner--not venturing to make a movement of any sort.
Three months after our arrival in St. Petersburg I was sent to a

boarding-school.
Here I found myself thrown among strange people; here

everything was grim and uninviting, with teachers continually shouting

at me, and my fellow-pupils for ever holding me up to derision, and

myself constantly feeling awkward and uncouth.
How strict, how exacting

was the system!
Appointed hours for everything, a common table,

ever-insistent teachers!
These things simply worried and tortured me.
Never from the first could I sleep, but used to weep many a chill, weary

night away.
In the evenings everyone would have to repeat or to learn

her lessons.
As I crouched over a dialogue or a vocabulary, without

daring even to stir, how my thoughts would turn to the chimney-corner

at home, to my father, to my mother, to my old nurse, to the tales which

the latter had been used to tell!
How sad it all was!
The memory of the

merest trifle at home would please me, and I would think and think how

nice things used to be at home.
Once more I would be sitting in our

little parlour at tea with my parents--in the familiar little parlour

where everything was snug and warm!
How ardently, how convulsively I

would seem to be embracing my mother!
Thus I would ponder, until at

length tears of sorrow would softly gush forth and choke my bosom, and

drive the lessons out of my head.
For I never could master the tasks of

the morrow; no matter how much my mistress and fellow-pupils might gird

at me, no matter how much I might repeat my lessons over and over to

myself, knowledge never came with the morning.
Consequently, I used to

be ordered the kneeling punishment, and given only one meal in the day.
How dull and dispirited I used to feel!
From the first my fellow-pupils

used to tease and deride and mock me whenever I was saying my lessons.
Also, they used to pinch me as we were on our way to dinner or tea, and

to make groundless complaints of me to the head mistress.
On the other

hand, how heavenly it seemed when, on Saturday evening, my old nurse

arrived to fetch me!
How I would embrace the old woman in transports

of joy!
After dressing me, and wrapping me up, she would find that

she could scarcely keep pace with me on the way home, so full was I of

chatter and tales about one thing and another.
Then, when I had arrived

home merry and lighthearted, how fervently I would embrace my parents,

as though I had not seen them for ten years.
Such a fussing would there

be--such a talking and a telling of tales!
To everyone I would run with

a greeting, and laugh, and giggle, and scamper about, and skip for

very joy.
True, my father and I used to have grave conversations about

lessons and teachers and the French language and grammar; yet we were

all very happy and contented together.
Even now it thrills me to think

of those moments.
For my father’s sake I tried hard to learn my lessons,

for I could see that he was spending his last kopeck upon me, and

himself subsisting God knows how.
Every day he grew more morose and

discontented and irritable; every day his character kept changing for

the worse.
He had suffered an influx of debts, nor were his business

affairs prospering.
As for my mother, she was afraid even to say a word,

or to weep aloud, for fear of still further angering him.
Gradually

she sickened, grew thinner and thinner, and became taken with a painful

cough.
Whenever I reached home from school I would find every one

low-spirited, and my mother shedding silent tears, and my father raging.
Bickering and high words would arise, during which my father was wont

to declare that, though he no longer derived the smallest pleasure or

relaxation from life, and had spent his last coin upon my education, I

had not yet mastered the French language.
In short, everything began to

go wrong, to turn to unhappiness; and for that circumstance, my father

took vengeance upon myself and my mother.
How he could treat my poor

mother so I cannot understand.
It used to rend my heart to see her, so

hollow were her cheeks becoming, so sunken her eyes, so hectic her

face.
But it was chiefly around myself that the disputes raged.
Though

beginning only with some trifle, they would soon go on to God knows

what.
Frequently, even I myself did not know to what they related.
Anything and everything would enter into them, for my father would say

that I was an utter dunce at the French language; that the head mistress

of my school was a stupid, common sort of women who cared nothing for

morals; that he (my father) had not yet succeeded in obtaining another

post; that Lamonde’s “Grammar” was a wretched book--even a worse one

than Zapolski’s; that a great deal of money had been squandered upon me;

that it was clear that I was wasting my time in repeating dialogues

and vocabularies; that I alone was at fault, and that I must answer for

everything.
Yet this did not arise from any WANT OF LOVE for me on the

part of my father, but rather from the fact that he was incapable of

putting himself in my own and my mother’s place.
It came of a defect of

character.
All these cares and worries and disappointments tortured my poor father

until he became moody and distrustful.
Next he began to neglect his

health, with the result that, catching a chill, he died, after a short

illness, so suddenly and unexpectedly that for a few days we were almost

beside ourselves with the shock--my mother, in particular, lying for

a while in such a state of torpor that I had fears for her reason.
The

instant my father was dead creditors seemed to spring up out of the

ground, and to assail us en masse.
Everything that we possessed had to

be surrendered to them, including a little house which my father had

bought six months after our arrival in St. Petersburg.
How matters

were finally settled I do not know, but we found ourselves roofless,

shelterless, and without a copper.
My mother was grievously ill, and

of means of subsistence we had none.
Before us there loomed only ruin,

sheer ruin.
At the time I was fourteen years old.
Soon afterwards Anna

Thedorovna came to see us, saying that she was a lady of property and

our relative; and this my mother confirmed--though, true, she added that

Anna was only a very DISTANT relative.
Anna had never taken the least

notice of us during my father’s lifetime, yet now she entered our

presence with tears in her eyes, and an assurance that she meant to

better our fortunes.
Having condoled with us on our loss and destitute

position, she added that my father had been to blame for everything, in

that he had lived beyond his means, and taken upon himself more than he

was able to perform.
Also, she expressed a wish to draw closer to us,

and to forget old scores; and when my mother explained that, for her own

part, she harboured no resentment against Anna, the latter burst into

tears, and, hurrying my mother away to church, then and there ordered

Mass to be said for the “dear departed,” as she called my father.
In

this manner she effected a solemn reconciliation with my mother.
Next, after long negotiations and vacillations, coupled with much

vivid description of our destitute position, our desolation, and our

helplessness, Anna invited us to pay her (as she expressed it) a

“return visit.” For this my mother duly thanked her, and considered the

invitation for a while; after which, seeing that there was nothing

else to be done, she informed Anna Thedorovna that she was prepared,

gratefully, to accept her offer.
Ah, how I remember the morning when we

removed to Vassilievski Island!
[A quarter of St.
Petersburg.]
It was a

clear, dry, frosty morning in autumn.
My mother could not restrain

her tears, and I too felt depressed.
Nay, my very heart seemed to be

breaking under a strange, undefined load of sorrow.
How terrible it all

seemed!...
II



AT first--that is to say, until my mother and myself grew used to

our new abode--we found living at Anna Thedorovna’s both strange and

disagreeable.
The house was her own, and contained five rooms, three of

which she shared with my orphaned cousin, Sasha (whom she had brought up

from babyhood); a fourth was occupied by my mother and myself; and the

fifth was rented of Anna by a poor student named Pokrovski.
Although

Anna lived in good style--in far better style than might have been

expected--her means and her avocation were conjectural.
Never was she

at rest; never was she not busy with some mysterious something or other.
Also, she possessed a wide and varied circle of friends.
The stream of

callers was perpetual--although God only knows who they were, or what

their business was.
No sooner did my mother hear the door-bell ring than

off she would carry me to our own apartment.
This greatly displeased

Anna, who used again and again to assure my mother that we were too

proud for our station in life.
In fact, she would sulk for hours about

it.
At the time I could not understand these reproaches, and it was

not until long afterwards that I learned--or rather, I guessed--why

eventually my mother declared that she could not go on living with Anna.
Yes, Anna was a bad woman.
Never did she let us alone.
As to the exact

motive why she had asked us to come and share her house with her I am

still in the dark.
At first she was not altogether unkind to us but,

later, she revealed to us her real character--as soon, that is to say,

as she saw that we were at her mercy, and had nowhere else to go.
Yes, in early days she was quite kind to me--even offensively so, but

afterwards, I had to suffer as much as my mother.
Constantly did Anna

reproach us; constantly did she remind us of her benefactions, and

introduce us to her friends as poor relatives of hers whom, out of

goodness of heart and for the love of Christ, she had received into her

bosom.
At table, also, she would watch every mouthful that we took;

and, if our appetite failed, immediately she would begin as before, and

reiterate that we were over-dainty, that we must not assume that riches

would mean happiness, and that we had better go and live by ourselves.
Moreover, she never ceased to inveigh against my father--saying that

he had sought to be better than other people, and thereby had brought

himself to a bad end; that he had left his wife and daughter destitute;

and that, but for the fact that we had happened to meet with a kind and

sympathetic Christian soul, God alone knew where we should have laid our

heads, save in the street.
What did that woman not say?
To hear her was

not so much galling as disgusting.
From time to time my mother would

burst into tears, her health grew worse from day to day, and her body

was becoming sheer skin and bone.
All the while, too, we had to work--to

work from morning till night, for we had contrived to obtain some

employment as occasional sempstresses.
This, however, did not please

Anna, who used to tell us that there was no room in her house for a

modiste’s establishment.
Yet we had to get clothes to wear, to provide

for unforeseen expenses, and to have a little money at our disposal in

case we should some day wish to remove elsewhere.
Unfortunately, the

strain undermined my mother’s health, and she became gradually weaker.
Sickness, like a cankerworm, was gnawing at her life, and dragging her

towards the tomb.
Well could I see what she was enduring, what she was

suffering.
Yes, it all lay open to my eyes.
Day succeeded day, and each day was like the last one.
We lived a life

as quiet as though we had been in the country.
Anna herself grew quieter

in proportion as she came to realise the extent of her power over us.
In nothing did we dare to thwart her.
From her portion of the house

our apartment was divided by a corridor, while next to us (as mentioned

above) dwelt a certain Pokrovski, who was engaged in teaching Sasha the

French and German languages, as well as history and geography--“all the

sciences,” as Anna used to say.
In return for these services he received

free board and lodging.
As for Sasha, she was a clever, but rude and

uncouth, girl of thirteen.
On one occasion Anna remarked to my mother

that it might be as well if I also were to take some lessons, seeing

that my education had been neglected at school; and, my mother joyfully

assenting, I joined Sasha for a year in studying under this Pokrovski.
The latter was a poor--a very poor--young man whose health would not

permit of his undertaking the regular university course.
Indeed, it was

only for form’s sake that we called him “The Student.” He lived in such

a quiet, humble, retiring fashion that never a sound reached us from his

room.
Also, his exterior was peculiar--he moved and walked awkwardly,

and uttered his words in such a strange manner that at first I could

never look at him without laughing.
Sasha was for ever playing tricks

upon him--more especially when he was giving us our lessons.
But

unfortunately, he was of a temperament as excitable as herself.
Indeed,

he was so irritable that the least trifle would send him into a frenzy,

and set him shouting at us, and complaining of our conduct.
Sometimes he

would even rush away to his room before school hours were over, and sit

there for days over his books, of which he had a store that was

both rare and valuable.
In addition, he acted as teacher at another

establishment, and received payment for his services there; and,

whenever he had received his fees for this extra work, he would hasten

off and purchase more books.
In time I got to know and like him better, for in reality he was a good,

worthy fellow--more so than any of the people with whom we otherwise

came in contact.
My mother in particular had a great respect for him,

and, after herself, he was my best friend.
But at first I was just an

overgrown hoyden, and joined Sasha in playing the fool.
For hours we

would devise tricks to anger and distract him, for he looked extremely

ridiculous when he was angry, and so diverted us the more (ashamed

though I am now to admit it).
But once, when we had driven him nearly

to tears, I heard him say to himself under his breath, “What cruel

children!” and instantly I repented--I began to feel sad and ashamed and

sorry for him.
I reddened to my ears, and begged him, almost with tears,

not to mind us, nor to take offence at our stupid jests.
Nevertheless,

without finishing the lesson, he closed his book, and departed to his

own room.
All that day I felt torn with remorse.
To think that we two

children had forced him, the poor, the unhappy one, to remember his hard

lot!
And at night I could not sleep for grief and regret.
Remorse is

said to bring relief to the soul, but it is not so.
How far my grief was

internally connected with my conceit I do not know, but at least I did

not wish him to think me a baby, seeing that I had now reached the age

of fifteen years.
Therefore, from that day onwards I began to torture

my imagination with devising a thousand schemes which should compel

Pokrovski to alter his opinion of me.
At the same time, being yet shy

and reserved by nature, I ended by finding that, in my present position,

I could make up my mind to nothing but vague dreams (and such dreams

I had).
However, I ceased to join Sasha in playing the fool, while

Pokrovski, for his part, ceased to lose his temper with us so much.
Unfortunately this was not enough to satisfy my self-esteem.
At this point, I must say a few words about the strangest, the most

interesting, the most pitiable human being that I have ever come across.
I speak of him now--at this particular point in these memoirs--for the

reason that hitherto I had paid him no attention whatever, and began to

do so now only because everything connected with Pokrovski had suddenly

become of absorbing interest in my eyes.
Sometimes there came to the house a ragged, poorly-dressed, grey-headed,

awkward, amorphous--in short, a very strange-looking--little old man.
At

first glance it might have been thought that he was perpetually ashamed

of something--that he had on his conscience something which always made

him, as it were, bristle up and then shrink into himself.
Such curious

starts and grimaces did he indulge in that one was forced to conclude

that he was scarcely in his right mind.
On arriving, he would halt for

a while by the window in the hall, as though afraid to enter; until,

should any one happen to pass in or out of the door--whether Sasha or

myself or one of the servants (to the latter he always resorted the most

readily, as being the most nearly akin to his own class)--he would begin

to gesticulate and to beckon to that person, and to make various signs.
Then, should the person in question nod to him, or call him by name (the

recognised token that no other visitor was present, and that he

might enter freely), he would open the door gently, give a smile of

satisfaction as he rubbed his hands together, and proceed on tiptoe to

young Pokrovski’s room.
This old fellow was none other than Pokrovski’s

father.
Later I came to know his story in detail.
Formerly a civil servant, he

had possessed no additional means, and so had occupied a very low

and insignificant position in the service.
Then, after his first wife

(mother of the younger Pokrovski) had died, the widower bethought him of

marrying a second time, and took to himself a tradesman’s daughter, who

soon assumed the reins over everything, and brought the home to rack and

ruin, so that the old man was worse off than before.
But to the younger

Pokrovski, fate proved kinder, for a landowner named Bwikov, who had

formerly known the lad’s father and been his benefactor, took the boy

under his protection, and sent him to school.
Another reason why this

Bwikov took an interest in young Pokrovski was that he had known the

lad’s dead mother, who, while still a serving-maid, had been befriended

by Anna Thedorovna, and subsequently married to the elder Pokrovski.
At

the wedding Bwikov, actuated by his friendship for Anna, conferred upon

the young bride a dowry of five thousand roubles; but whither that money

had since disappeared I cannot say.
It was from Anna’s lips that I heard

the story, for the student Pokrovski was never prone to talk about his

family affairs.
His mother was said to have been very good-looking;

wherefore, it is the more mysterious why she should have made so poor a

match.
She died when young--only four years after her espousal.
From school the young Pokrovski advanced to a gymnasium, [Secondary

school.]
and thence to the University, where Bwikov, who frequently

visited the capital, continued to accord the youth his protection.
Gradually, however, ill health put an end to the young man’s university

course; whereupon Bwikov introduced and personally recommended him to

Anna Thedorovna, and he came to lodge with her on condition that he

taught Sasha whatever might be required of him.
Grief at the harshness of his wife led the elder Pokrovski to plunge

into dissipation, and to remain in an almost permanent condition of

drunkenness.
Constantly his wife beat him, or sent him to sit in the

kitchen--with the result that in time, he became so inured to blows

and neglect, that he ceased to complain.
Still not greatly advanced

in years, he had nevertheless endangered his reason through evil

courses--his only sign of decent human feeling being his love for his

son.
The latter was said to resemble his dead mother as one pea may

resemble another.
What recollections, therefore, of the kind helpmeet of

former days may not have moved the breast of the poor broken old man to

this boundless affection for the boy?
Of naught else could the father

ever speak but of his son, and never did he fail to visit him twice a

week.
To come oftener he did not dare, for the reason that the younger

Pokrovski did not like these visits of his father’s.
In fact, there

can be no doubt that the youth’s greatest fault was his lack of filial

respect.
Yet the father was certainly rather a difficult person to deal

with, for, in the first place, he was extremely inquisitive, while, in

the second place, his long-winded conversation and questions--questions

of the most vapid and senseless order conceivable--always prevented

the son from working.
Likewise, the old man occasionally arrived there

drunk.
Gradually, however, the son was weaning his parent from his

vicious ways and everlasting inquisitiveness, and teaching the old man

to look upon him, his son, as an oracle, and never to speak without that

son’s permission.
On the subject of his Petinka, as he called him, the poor old man could

never sufficiently rhapsodise and dilate.
Yet when he arrived to see his

son he almost invariably had on his face a downcast, timid expression

that was probably due to uncertainty concerning the way in which he

would be received.
For a long time he would hesitate to enter, and if I

happened to be there he would question me for twenty minutes or so as to

whether his Petinka was in good health, as well as to the sort of

mood he was in, whether he was engaged on matters of importance, what

precisely he was doing (writing or meditating), and so on.
Then, when I

had sufficiently encouraged and reassured the old man, he would make up

his mind to enter, and quietly and cautiously open the door.
Next, he

would protrude his head through the chink, and if he saw that his son

was not angry, but threw him a nod, he would glide noiselessly into the

room, take off his scarf, and hang up his hat (the latter perennially

in a bad state of repair, full of holes, and with a smashed brim)--the

whole being done without a word or a sound of any kind.
Next, the old

man would seat himself warily on a chair, and, never removing his eyes

from his son, follow his every movement, as though seeking to gauge

Petinka’s state of mind.
On the other hand, if the son was not in good

spirits, the father would make a note of the fact, and at once get up,

saying that he had “only called for a minute or two,” that, “having been

out for a long walk, and happening at the moment to be passing,” he had

“looked in for a moment’s rest.” Then silently and humbly the old man

would resume his hat and scarf; softly he would open the door, and

noiselessly depart with a forced smile on his face--the better to bear

the disappointment which was seething in his breast, the better to help

him not to show it to his son.
On the other hand, whenever the son received his father civilly the old

man would be struck dumb with joy.
Satisfaction would beam in his face,

in his every gesture, in his every movement.
And if the son deigned to

engage in conversation with him, the old man always rose a little from

his chair, and answered softly, sympathetically, with something like

reverence, while strenuously endeavouring to make use of the most

recherche (that is to say, the most ridiculous) expressions.
But, alas!
He had not the gift of words.
Always he grew confused, and turned red in

the face; never did he know what to do with his hands or with himself.
Likewise, whenever he had returned an answer of any kind, he would go

on repeating the same in a whisper, as though he were seeking to justify

what he had just said.
And if he happened to have returned a good

answer, he would begin to preen himself, and to straighten his

waistcoat, frockcoat and tie, and to assume an air of conscious dignity.
Indeed, on these occasions he would feel so encouraged, he would carry

his daring to such a pitch, that, rising softly from his chair, he would

approach the bookshelves, take thence a book, and read over to himself

some passage or another.
All this he would do with an air of feigned

indifference and sangfroid, as though he were free ALWAYS to use his

son’s books, and his son’s kindness were no rarity at all.
Yet on one

occasion I saw the poor old fellow actually turn pale on being told by

his son not to touch the books.
Abashed and confused, he, in his awkward

hurry, replaced the volume wrong side uppermost; whereupon, with a

supreme effort to recover himself, he turned it round with a smile and

a blush, as though he were at a loss how to view his own misdemeanour.
Gradually, as already said, the younger Pokrovski weaned his father

from his dissipated ways by giving him a small coin whenever, on three

successive occasions, he (the father) arrived sober.
Sometimes, also,

the younger man would buy the older one shoes, or a tie, or a waistcoat;

whereafter, the old man would be as proud of his acquisition as a

peacock.
Not infrequently, also, the old man would step in to visit

ourselves, and bring Sasha and myself gingerbread birds or apples,

while talking unceasingly of Petinka.
Always he would beg of us to pay

attention to our lessons, on the plea that Petinka was a good son, an

exemplary son, a son who was in twofold measure a man of learning; after

which he would wink at us so quizzingly with his left eye, and twist

himself about in such amusing fashion, that we were forced to burst out

laughing.
My mother had a great liking for him, but he detested Anna

Thedorovna--although in her presence he would be quieter than water and

lowlier than the earth.
Soon after this I ceased to take lessons of Pokrovski.
Even now he

thought me a child, a raw schoolgirl, as much as he did Sasha; and this

hurt me extremely, seeing that I had done so much to expiate my former

behaviour.
Of my efforts in this direction no notice had been taken,

and the fact continued to anger me more and more.
Scarcely ever did I

address a word to my tutor between school hours, for I simply could

not bring myself to do it.
If I made the attempt I only grew red and

confused, and rushed away to weep in a corner.
How it would all have

ended I do not know, had not a curious incident helped to bring about

a rapprochement.
One evening, when my mother was sitting in Anna

Thedorovna’s room, I crept on tiptoe to Pokrovski’s apartment, in the

belief that he was not at home.
Some strange impulse moved me to do so.
True, we had lived cheek by jowl with one another; yet never once had

I caught a glimpse of his abode.
Consequently my heart beat loudly--so

loudly, indeed, that it seemed almost to be bursting from my breast.
On

entering the room I glanced around me with tense interest.
The apartment

was very poorly furnished, and bore few traces of orderliness.
On table

and chairs there lay heaps of books; everywhere were books and papers.
Then a strange thought entered my head, as well as, with the thought, an

unpleasant feeling of irritation.
It seemed to me that my friendship,

my heart’s affection, meant little to him, for HE was well-educated,

whereas I was stupid, and had learned nothing, and had read not a single

book.
So I stood looking wistfully at the long bookshelves where

they groaned under their weight of volumes.
I felt filled with grief,

disappointment, and a sort of frenzy.
I felt that I MUST read those

books, and decided to do so--to read them one by one, and with all

possible speed.
Probably the idea was that, by learning whatsoever HE

knew, I should render myself more worthy of his friendship.
So, I made

a rush towards the bookcase nearest me, and, without stopping further

to consider matters, seized hold of the first dusty tome upon which my

hands chanced to alight, and, reddening and growing pale by turns, and

trembling with fear and excitement, clasped the stolen book to my breast

with the intention of reading it by candle light while my mother lay

asleep at night.
But how vexed I felt when, on returning to our own room, and hastily

turning the pages, only an old, battered worm-eaten Latin work greeted

my eyes!
Without loss of time I retraced my steps.
Just when I was about

to replace the book I heard a noise in the corridor outside, and the

sound of footsteps approaching.
Fumblingly I hastened to complete what

I was about, but the tiresome book had become so tightly wedged into

its row that, on being pulled out, it caused its fellows to close up too

compactly to leave any place for their comrade.
To insert the book was

beyond my strength; yet still I kept pushing and pushing at the row.
At

last the rusty nail which supported the shelf (the thing seemed to have

been waiting on purpose for that moment!)
broke off short; with the

result that the shelf descended with a crash, and the books piled

themselves in a heap on the floor!
Then the door of the room opened, and

Pokrovski entered!
I must here remark that he never could bear to have his possessions

tampered with.
Woe to the person, in particular, who touched his books!
Judge, therefore, of my horror when books small and great, books of

every possible shape and size and thickness, came tumbling from the

shelf, and flew and sprang over the table, and under the chairs, and

about the whole room.
I would have turned and fled, but it was too late.
“All is over!” thought I.
“All is over!
I am ruined, I am undone!
Here

have I been playing the fool like a ten-year-old child!
What a stupid

girl I am!
The monstrous fool!”



Indeed, Pokrovski was very angry.
“What?
Have you not done enough?” he

cried.
“Are you not ashamed to be for ever indulging in such pranks?
Are

you NEVER going to grow sensible?” With that he darted forward to pick

up the books, while I bent down to help him.
“You need not, you need not!” he went on.
“You would have done far

better not to have entered without an invitation.”



Next, a little mollified by my humble demeanour, he resumed in his usual

tutorial tone--the tone which he had adopted in his new-found role of

preceptor:



“When are you going to grow steadier and more thoughtful?
Consider

yourself for a moment.
You are no longer a child, a little girl, but a

maiden of fifteen.”



Then, with a desire (probably) to satisfy himself that I was no longer a

being of tender years, he threw me a glance--but straightway reddened to

his very ears.
This I could not understand, but stood gazing at him in

astonishment.
Presently, he straightened himself a little, approached

me with a sort of confused expression, and haltingly said

something--probably it was an apology for not having before perceived

that I was now a grown-up young person.
But the next moment I

understood.
What I did I hardly know, save that, in my dismay and

confusion, I blushed even more hotly than he had done and, covering my

face with my hands, rushed from the room.
What to do with myself for shame I could not think.
The one thought in

my head was that he had surprised me in his room.
For three whole days

I found myself unable to raise my eyes to his, but blushed always to

the point of weeping.
The strangest and most confused of thoughts kept

entering my brain.
One of them--the most extravagant--was that I should

dearly like to go to Pokrovski, and to explain to him the situation, and

to make full confession, and to tell him everything without concealment,

and to assure him that I had not acted foolishly as a minx, but honestly

and of set purpose.
In fact, I DID make up my mind to take this course,

but lacked the necessary courage to do it.
If I had done so, what a

figure I should have cut!
Even now I am ashamed to think of it.
A few days later, my mother suddenly fell dangerously ill. For two

days past she had not left her bed, while during the third night of her

illness she became seized with fever and delirium.
I also had not closed

my eyes during the previous night, but now waited upon my mother, sat by

her bed, brought her drink at intervals, and gave her medicine at duly

appointed hours.
The next night I suffered terribly.
Every now and then

sleep would cause me to nod, and objects grow dim before my eyes.
Also,

my head was turning dizzy, and I could have fainted for very weariness.
Yet always my mother’s feeble moans recalled me to myself as I started,

momentarily awoke, and then again felt drowsiness overcoming me.
What

torture it was!
I do not know, I cannot clearly remember, but I think

that, during a moment when wakefulness was thus contending with slumber,

a strange dream, a horrible vision, visited my overwrought brain, and

I awoke in terror.
The room was nearly in darkness, for the candle was

flickering, and throwing stray beams of light which suddenly illuminated

the room, danced for a moment on the walls, and then disappeared.
Somehow I felt afraid--a sort of horror had come upon me--my imagination

had been over-excited by the evil dream which I had experienced, and a

feeling of oppression was crushing my heart....
I leapt from the chair,

and involuntarily uttered a cry--a cry wrung from me by the terrible,

torturing sensation that was upon me.
Presently the door opened, and

Pokrovski entered.
I remember that I was in his arms when I recovered my senses.
Carefully

seating me on a bench, he handed me a glass of water, and then asked me

a few questions--though how I answered them I do not know.
“You yourself

are ill,” he said as he took my hand.
“You yourself are VERY ill. You

are feverish, and I can see that you are knocking yourself out through

your neglect of your own health.
Take a little rest.
Lie down and go to

sleep.
Yes, lie down, lie down,” he continued without giving me time to

protest.
Indeed, fatigue had so exhausted my strength that my eyes

were closing from very weakness.
So I lay down on the bench with the

intention of sleeping for half an hour only; but, I slept till morning.
Pokrovski then awoke me, saying that it was time for me to go and give

my mother her medicine.
When the next evening, about eight o’clock, I had rested a little and

was preparing to spend the night in a chair beside my mother (fixedly

meaning not to go to sleep this time), Pokrovski suddenly knocked at

the door.
I opened it, and he informed me that, since, possibly, I

might find the time wearisome, he had brought me a few books to read.
I

accepted the books, but do not, even now, know what books they were, nor

whether I looked into them, despite the fact that I never closed my eyes

the whole night long.
The truth was that a strange feeling of excitement

was preventing me from sleeping, and I could not rest long in any one

spot, but had to keep rising from my chair, and walking about the

room.
Throughout my whole being there seemed to be diffused a kind of

elation--of elation at Pokrovski’s attentions, at the thought that he

was anxious and uneasy about me.
Until dawn I pondered and dreamed; and

though I felt sure Pokrovski would not again visit us that night, I gave

myself up to fancies concerning what he might do the following evening.
That evening, when everyone else in the house had retired to rest,

Pokrovski opened his door, and opened a conversation from the threshold

of his room.
Although, at this distance of time, I cannot remember a

word of what we said to one another, I remember that I blushed, grew

confused, felt vexed with myself, and awaited with impatience the end of

the conversation although I myself had been longing for the meeting

to take place, and had spent the day in dreaming of it, and devising

a string of suitable questions and replies.
Yes, that evening saw the

first strand in our friendship knitted; and each subsequent night of

my mother’s illness we spent several hours together.
Little by little I

overcame his reserve, but found that each of these conversations left me

filled with a sense of vexation at myself.
At the same time, I could see

with secret joy and a sense of proud elation that I was leading him to

forget his tiresome books.
At last the conversation turned jestingly

upon the upsetting of the shelf.
The moment was a peculiar one, for it

came upon me just when I was in the right mood for self-revelation and

candour.
In my ardour, my curious phase of exaltation, I found myself

led to make a full confession of the fact that I had become wishful to

learn, to KNOW, something, since I had felt hurt at being taken for a

chit, a mere baby....
I repeat that that night I was in a very strange

frame of mind.
My heart was inclined to be tender, and there were

tears standing in my eyes.
Nothing did I conceal as I told him about

my friendship for him, about my desire to love him, about my scheme

for living in sympathy with him and comforting him, and making his

life easier.
In return he threw me a look of confusion mingled with

astonishment, and said nothing.
Then suddenly I began to feel terribly

pained and disappointed, for I conceived that he had failed to

understand me, or even that he might be laughing at me.
Bursting into

tears like a child, I sobbed, and could not stop myself, for I had

fallen into a kind of fit; whereupon he seized my hand, kissed it, and

clasped it to his breast--saying various things, meanwhile, to comfort

me, for he was labouring under a strong emotion.
Exactly what he said

I do not remember--I merely wept and laughed by turns, and blushed, and

found myself unable to speak a word for joy.
Yet, for all my agitation,

I noticed that about him there still lingered an air of constraint

and uneasiness.
Evidently, he was lost in wonder at my enthusiasm and

raptures--at my curiously ardent, unexpected, consuming friendship.
It

may be that at first he was amazed, but that afterwards he accepted my

devotion and words of invitation and expressions of interest with the

same simple frankness as I had offered them, and responded to them

with an interest, a friendliness, a devotion equal to my own, even as a

friend or a brother would do.
How happy, how warm was the feeling in my

heart!
Nothing had I concealed or repressed.
No, I had bared all to his

sight, and each day would see him draw nearer to me.
Truly I could not say what we did not talk about during those painful,

yet rapturous, hours when, by the trembling light of a lamp, and almost

at the very bedside of my poor sick mother, we kept midnight tryst.
Whatsoever first came into our heads we spoke of--whatsoever came riven

from our hearts, whatsoever seemed to call for utterance, found voice.
And almost always we were happy.
What a grievous, yet joyous, period it

was--a period grievous and joyous at the same time!
To this day it both

hurts and delights me to recall it.
Joyous or bitter though it was, its

memories are yet painful.
At least they seem so to me, though a certain

sweetness assuaged the pain.
So, whenever I am feeling heartsick and

oppressed and jaded and sad those memories return to freshen and revive

me, even as drops of evening dew return to freshen and revive, after a

sultry day, the poor faded flower which has long been drooping in the

noontide heat.
My mother grew better, but still I continued to spend the nights on

a chair by her bedside.
Often, too, Pokrovski would give me books.
At

first I read them merely so as to avoid going to sleep, but afterwards I

examined them with more attention, and subsequently with actual avidity,

for they opened up to me a new, an unexpected, an unknown, an unfamiliar

world.
New thoughts, added to new impressions, would come pouring

into my heart in a rich flood; and the more emotion, the more pain and

labour, it cost me to assimilate these new impressions, the dearer did

they become to me, and the more gratefully did they stir my soul to

its very depths.
Crowding into my heart without giving it time even to

breathe, they would cause my whole being to become lost in a wondrous

chaos.
Yet this spiritual ferment was not sufficiently strong wholly to

undo me.
For that I was too fanciful, and the fact saved me.
With the passing of my mother’s illness the midnight meetings and

long conversations between myself and Pokrovski came to an end.
Only

occasionally did we exchange a few words with one another--words, for

the most part, that were of little purport or substance, yet words

to which it delighted me to apportion their several meanings, their

peculiar secret values.
My life had now become full--I was happy; I was

quietly, restfully happy.
Thus did several weeks elapse....



One day the elder Pokrovski came to see us, and chattered in a

brisk, cheerful, garrulous sort of way.
He laughed, launched out into

witticisms, and, finally, resolved the riddle of his transports by

informing us that in a week’s time it would be his Petinka’s birthday,

when, in honour of the occasion, he (the father) meant to don a new

jacket (as well as new shoes which his wife was going to buy for him),

and to come and pay a visit to his son.
In short, the old man was

perfectly happy, and gossiped about whatsoever first entered his head.
My lover’s birthday!
Thenceforward, I could not rest by night or day.
Whatever might happen, it was my fixed intention to remind Pokrovski

of our friendship by giving him a present.
But what sort of present?
Finally, I decided to give him books.
I knew that he had long wanted to

possess a complete set of Pushkin’s works, in the latest edition; so,

I decided to buy Pushkin.
My private fund consisted of thirty roubles,

earned by handiwork, and designed eventually to procure me a new dress,

but at once I dispatched our cook, old Matrena, to ascertain the price

of such an edition.
Horrors!
The price of the eleven volumes, added to

extra outlay upon the binding, would amount to at least SIXTY roubles!
Where was the money to come from?
I thought and thought, yet could not

decide.
I did not like to resort to my mother.
Of course she would help

me, but in that case every one in the house would become aware of my

gift, and the gift itself would assume the guise of a recompense--of

payment for Pokrovski’s labours on my behalf during the past year;

whereas, I wished to present the gift ALONE, and without the knowledge

of anyone.
For the trouble that he had taken with me I wished to be his

perpetual debtor--to make him no payment at all save my friendship.
At

length, I thought of a way out of the difficulty.
I knew that of the hucksters in the Gostinni Dvor one could sometimes

buy a book--even one that had been little used and was almost entirely

new--for a half of its price, provided that one haggled sufficiently

over it; wherefore I determined to repair thither.
It so happened that,

next day, both Anna Thedorovna and ourselves were in want of sundry

articles; and since my mother was unwell and Anna lazy, the execution of

the commissions devolved upon me, and I set forth with Matrena.
Luckily, I soon chanced upon a set of Pushkin, handsomely bound, and

set myself to bargain for it.
At first more was demanded than would have

been asked of me in a shop; but afterwards--though not without a great

deal of trouble on my part, and several feints at departing--I induced

the dealer to lower his price, and to limit his demands to ten roubles

in silver.
How I rejoiced that I had engaged in this bargaining!
Poor

Matrena could not imagine what had come to me, nor why I so desired to

buy books.
But, oh horror of horrors!
As soon as ever the dealer caught

sight of my capital of thirty roubles in notes, he refused to let the

Pushkin go for less than the sum he had first named; and though, in

answer to my prayers and protestations, he eventually yielded a little,

he did so only to the tune of two-and-a-half roubles more than I

possessed, while swearing that he was making the concession for my sake

alone, since I was “a sweet young lady,” and that he would have done so

for no one else in the world.
To think that only two-and-a-half roubles

should still be wanting!
I could have wept with vexation.
Suddenly an

unlooked-for circumstance occurred to help me in my distress.
Not far away, near another table that was heaped with books, I perceived

the elder Pokrovski, and a crowd of four or five hucksters plaguing him

nearly out of his senses.
Each of these fellows was proffering the old

man his own particular wares; and while there was nothing that they did

not submit for his approval, there was nothing that he wished to buy.
The poor old fellow had the air of a man who is receiving a thrashing.
What to make of what he was being offered him he did not know.
Approaching him, I inquired what he happened to be doing there; whereat

the old man was delighted, since he liked me (it may be) no less than he

did Petinka.
“I am buying some books, Barbara Alexievna,” said he, “I am buying them

for my Petinka.
It will be his birthday soon, and since he likes books I

thought I would get him some.”



The old man always expressed himself in a very roundabout sort of

fashion, and on the present occasion he was doubly, terribly confused.
Of no matter what book he asked the price, it was sure to be one, two,

or three roubles.
The larger books he could not afford at all; he could

only look at them wistfully, fumble their leaves with his finger, turn

over the volumes in his hands, and then replace them.
“No, no, that

is too dear,” he would mutter under his breath.
“I must go and try

somewhere else.” Then again he would fall to examining copy-books,

collections of poems, and almanacs of the cheaper order.
“Why should you buy things like those?” I asked him.
“They are such

rubbish!”



“No, no!” he replied.
“See what nice books they are!
Yes, they ARE nice

books!” Yet these last words he uttered so lingeringly that I could see

he was ready to weep with vexation at finding the better sorts of books

so expensive.
Already a little tear was trickling down his pale cheeks

and red nose.
I inquired whether he had much money on him; whereupon the

poor old fellow pulled out his entire stock, wrapped in a piece of

dirty newspaper, and consisting of a few small silver coins, with twenty

kopecks in copper.
At once I seized the lot, and, dragging him off to my

huckster, said: “Look here.
These eleven volumes of Pushkin are priced

at thirty-two-and-a-half roubles, and I have only thirty roubles.
Let

us add to them these two-and-a-half roubles of yours, and buy the books

together, and make them our joint gift.” The old man was overjoyed, and

pulled out his money en masse; whereupon the huckster loaded him with

our common library.
Stuffing it into his pockets, as well as filling

both arms with it, he departed homewards with his prize, after giving me

his word to bring me the books privately on the morrow.
Next day the old man came to see his son, and sat with him, as usual,

for about an hour; after which he visited ourselves, wearing on his face

the most comical, the most mysterious expression conceivable.
Smiling

broadly with satisfaction at the thought that he was the possessor of a

secret, he informed me that he had stealthily brought the books to our

rooms, and hidden them in a corner of the kitchen, under Matrena’s care.
Next, by a natural transition, the conversation passed to the coming

fête-day; whereupon, the old man proceeded to hold forth extensively

on the subject of gifts.
The further he delved into his thesis, and the

more he expounded it, the clearer could I see that on his mind there was

something which he could not, dared not, divulge.
So I waited and kept

silent.
The mysterious exaltation, the repressed satisfaction which I

had hitherto discerned in his antics and grimaces and left-eyed winks

gradually disappeared, and he began to grow momentarily more anxious and

uneasy.
At length he could contain himself no longer.
“Listen, Barbara Alexievna,” he said timidly.
“Listen to what I have got

to say to you.
When his birthday is come, do you take TEN of the books,

and give them to him yourself--that is, FOR yourself, as being YOUR

share of the gift.
Then I will take the eleventh book, and give it to

him MYSELF, as being my gift.
If we do that, you will have a present for

him and I shall have one--both of us alike.”



“Why do you not want us to present our gifts together, Zachar

Petrovitch?” I asked him.
“Oh, very well,” he replied.
“Very well, Barbara Alexievna.
Only--only,

I thought that--”



The old man broke off in confusion, while his face flushed with the

exertion of thus expressing himself.
For a moment or two he sat glued to

his seat.
“You see,” he went on, “I play the fool too much.
I am forever playing

the fool, and cannot help myself, though I know that it is wrong to do

so.
At home it is often cold, and sometimes there are other troubles

as well, and it all makes me depressed.
Well, whenever that happens, I

indulge a little, and occasionally drink too much.
Now, Petinka does not

like that; he loses his temper about it, Barbara Alexievna, and scolds

me, and reads me lectures.
So I want by my gift to show him that I am

mending my ways, and beginning to conduct myself better.
For a long time

past, I have been saving up to buy him a book--yes, for a long time past

I have been saving up for it, since it is seldom that I have any

money, unless Petinka happens to give me some.
He knows that, and,

consequently, as soon as ever he perceives the use to which I have put

his money, he will understand that it is for his sake alone that I have

acted.”



My heart ached for the old man.
Seeing him looking at me with such

anxiety, I made up my mind without delay.
“I tell you what,” I said.
“Do you give him all the books.”



“ALL?” he ejaculated.
“ALL the books?”



“Yes, all of them.”



“As my own gift?”



“Yes, as your own gift.”



“As my gift alone?”



“Yes, as your gift alone.”



Surely I had spoken clearly enough, yet the old man seemed hardly to

understand me.
“Well,” said he after reflection, “that certainly would be

splendid--certainly it would be most splendid.
But what about yourself,

Barbara Alexievna?”



“Oh, I shall give your son nothing.”



“What?” he cried in dismay.
“Are you going to give Petinka nothing--do

you WISH to give him nothing?” So put about was the old fellow with what

I had said, that he seemed almost ready to renounce his own proposal

if only I would give his son something.
What a kind heart he had!
I

hastened to assure him that I should certainly have a gift of some sort

ready, since my one wish was to avoid spoiling his pleasure.
“Provided that your son is pleased,” I added, “and that you are pleased,

I shall be equally pleased, for in my secret heart I shall feel as

though I had presented the gift.”



This fully reassured the old man.
He stopped with us another couple of

hours, yet could not sit still for a moment, but kept jumping up from

his seat, laughing, cracking jokes with Sasha, bestowing stealthy kisses

upon myself, pinching my hands, and making silent grimaces at Anna

Thedorovna.
At length, she turned him out of the house.
In short, his

transports of joy exceeded anything that I had yet beheld.
On the festal day he arrived exactly at eleven o’clock, direct from

Mass.
He was dressed in a carefully mended frockcoat, a new waistcoat,

and a pair of new shoes, while in his arms he carried our pile of

books.
Next we all sat down to coffee (the day being Sunday) in Anna

Thedorovna’s parlour.
The old man led off the meal by saying

that Pushkin was a magnificent poet.
Thereafter, with a return to

shamefacedness and confusion, he passed suddenly to the statement that

a man ought to conduct himself properly; that, should he not do so, it

might be taken as a sign that he was in some way overindulging himself;

and that evil tendencies of this sort led to the man’s ruin and

degradation.
Then the orator sketched for our benefit some terrible

instances of such incontinence, and concluded by informing us that for

some time past he had been mending his own ways, and conducting himself

in exemplary fashion, for the reason that he had perceived the justice

of his son’s precepts, and had laid them to heart so well that he, the

father, had really changed for the better: in proof whereof, he now

begged to present to the said son some books for which he had long been

setting aside his savings.
As I listened to the old man I could not help laughing and crying in

a breath.
Certainly he knew how to lie when the occasion required!
The

books were transferred to his son’s room, and arranged upon a shelf,

where Pokrovski at once guessed the truth about them.
Then the old man

was invited to dinner and we all spent a merry day together at cards and

forfeits.
Sasha was full of life, and I rivalled her, while Pokrovski

paid me numerous attentions, and kept seeking an occasion to speak to me

alone.
But to allow this to happen I refused.
Yes, taken all in all, it

was the happiest day that I had known for four years.
But now only grievous, painful memories come to my recollection, for I

must enter upon the story of my darker experiences.
It may be that that

is why my pen begins to move more slowly, and seems as though it were

going altogether to refuse to write.
The same reason may account for my

having undertaken so lovingly and enthusiastically a recounting of even

the smallest details of my younger, happier days.
But alas!
those days

did not last long, and were succeeded by a period of black sorrow which

will close only God knows when!
My misfortunes began with the illness and death of Pokrovski, who was

taken worse two months after what I have last recorded in these memoirs.
During those two months he worked hard to procure himself a livelihood

since hitherto he had had no assured position.
Like all consumptives, he

never--not even up to his last moment--altogether abandoned the hope of

being able to enjoy a long life.
A post as tutor fell in his way, but he

had never liked the profession; while for him to become a civil servant

was out of the question, owing to his weak state of health.
Moreover, in

the latter capacity he would have had to have waited a long time for his

first instalment of salary.
Again, he always looked at the darker side

of things, for his character was gradually being warped, and his health

undermined by his illness, though he never noticed it.
Then autumn came

on, and daily he went out to business--that is to say, to apply for and

to canvass for posts--clad only in a light jacket; with the result that,

after repeated soakings with rain, he had to take to his bed, and

never again left it.
He died in mid-autumn at the close of the month of

October.
Throughout his illness I scarcely ever left his room, but waited on him

hand and foot.
Often he could not sleep for several nights at a time.
Often, too, he was unconscious, or else in a delirium; and at such times

he would talk of all sorts of things--of his work, of his books, of his

father, of myself.
At such times I learned much which I had not hitherto

known or divined about his affairs.
During the early part of his illness

everyone in the house looked askance at me, and Anna Thedorovna would

nod her head in a meaning manner; but, I always looked them straight in

the face, and gradually they ceased to take any notice of my concern for

Pokrovski.
At all events my mother ceased to trouble her head about it.
Sometimes Pokrovski would know who I was, but not often, for more

usually he was unconscious.
Sometimes, too, he would talk all night with

some unknown person, in dim, mysterious language that caused his gasping

voice to echo hoarsely through the narrow room as through a sepulchre;

and at such times, I found the situation a strange one.
During his last

night he was especially lightheaded, for then he was in terrible agony,

and kept rambling in his speech until my soul was torn with pity.
Everyone in the house was alarmed, and Anna Thedorovna fell to praying

that God might soon take him.
When the doctor had been summoned, the

verdict was that the patient would die with the morning.
That night the elder Pokrovski spent in the corridor, at the door of his

son’s room.
Though given a mattress to lie upon, he spent his time in

running in and out of the apartment.
So broken with grief was he that

he presented a dreadful spectacle, and appeared to have lost both

perception and feeling.
His head trembled with agony, and his body

quivered from head to foot as at times he murmured to himself something

which he appeared to be debating.
Every moment I expected to see him go

out of his mind.
Just before dawn he succumbed to the stress of mental

agony, and fell asleep on his mattress like a man who has been beaten;

but by eight o’clock the son was at the point of death, and I ran to

wake the father.
The dying man was quite conscious, and bid us all

farewell.
Somehow I could not weep, though my heart seemed to be

breaking.
The last moments were the most harassing and heartbreaking of all.
For

some time past Pokrovski had been asking for something with his failing

tongue, but I had been unable to distinguish his words.
Yet my heart had

been bursting with grief.
Then for an hour he had lain quieter, except

that he had looked sadly in my direction, and striven to make some sign

with his death-cold hands.
At last he again essayed his piteous request

in a hoarse, deep voice, but the words issued in so many inarticulate

sounds, and once more I failed to divine his meaning.
By turns I brought

each member of the household to his bedside, and gave him something to

drink, but he only shook his head sorrowfully.
Finally, I understood

what it was he wanted.
He was asking me to draw aside the curtain from

the window, and to open the casements.
Probably he wished to take his

last look at the daylight and the sun and all God’s world.
I pulled back

the curtain, but the opening day was as dull and mournful--looking as

though it had been the fast-flickering life of the poor invalid.
Of

sunshine there was none.
Clouds overlaid the sky as with a shroud of

mist, and everything looked sad, rainy, and threatening under a fine

drizzle which was beating against the window-panes, and streaking their

dull, dark surfaces with runlets of cold, dirty moisture.
Only a scanty

modicum of daylight entered to war with the trembling rays of the ikon

lamp.
The dying man threw me a wistful look, and nodded.
The next moment

he had passed away.
The funeral was arranged for by Anna Thedorovna.
A plain coffin was

bought, and a broken-down hearse hired; while, as security for

this outlay, she seized the dead man’s books and other articles.
Nevertheless, the old man disputed the books with her, and, raising an

uproar, carried off as many of them as he could--stuffing his pockets

full, and even filling his hat.
Indeed, he spent the next three days

with them thus, and refused to let them leave his sight even when it was

time for him to go to church.
Throughout he acted like a man bereft

of sense and memory.
With quaint assiduity he busied himself about the

bier--now straightening the candlestick on the dead man’s breast, now

snuffing and lighting the other candles.
Clearly his thoughts were

powerless to remain long fixed on any subject.
Neither my mother nor

Anna Thedorovna were present at the requiem, for the former was ill

and the latter was at loggerheads with the old man.
Only myself and

the father were there.
During the service a sort of panic, a sort of

premonition of the future, came over me, and I could hardly hold myself

upright.
At length the coffin had received its burden and was screwed

down; after which the bearers placed it upon a bier, and set out.
I

accompanied the cortège only to the end of the street.
Here the

driver broke into a trot, and the old man started to run behind the

hearse--sobbing loudly, but with the motion of his running ever and anon

causing the sobs to quaver and become broken off.
Next he lost his hat,

the poor old fellow, yet would not stop to pick it up, even though the

rain was beating upon his head, and a wind was rising and the sleet kept

stinging and lashing his face.
It seemed as though he were impervious

to the cruel elements as he ran from one side of the hearse to the

other--the skirts of his old greatcoat flapping about him like a pair

of wings.
From every pocket of the garment protruded books, while in his

hand he carried a specially large volume, which he hugged closely to his

breast.
The passers-by uncovered their heads and crossed themselves as

the cortège passed, and some of them, having done so, remained staring

in amazement at the poor old man.
Every now and then a book would slip

from one of his pockets and fall into the mud; whereupon somebody,

stopping him, would direct his attention to his loss, and he would stop,

pick up the book, and again set off in pursuit of the hearse.
At the

corner of the street he was joined by a ragged old woman; until at

length the hearse turned a corner, and became hidden from my eyes.
Then

I went home, and threw myself, in a transport of grief, upon my mother’s

breast--clasping her in my arms, kissing her amid a storm of sobs and

tears, and clinging to her form as though in my embraces I were holding

my last friend on earth, that I might preserve her from death.
Yet

already death was standing over her....









June 11th



How I thank you for our walk to the Islands yesterday, Makar

Alexievitch!
How fresh and pleasant, how full of verdure, was

everything!
And I had not seen anything green for such a long time!
During my illness I used to think that I should never get better, that

I was certainly going to die.
Judge, then, how I felt yesterday!
True,

I may have seemed to you a little sad, and you must not be angry with me

for that.
Happy and light-hearted though I was, there were moments, even

at the height of my felicity, when, for some unknown reason, depression

came sweeping over my soul.
I kept weeping about trifles, yet could not

say why I was grieved.
The truth is that I am unwell--so much so, that

I look at everything from the gloomy point of view.
The pale, clear sky,

the setting sun, the evening stillness--ah, somehow I felt disposed

to grieve and feel hurt at these things; my heart seemed to be

over-charged, and to be calling for tears to relieve it.
But why should

I write this to you?
It is difficult for my heart to express itself;

still more difficult for it to forego self-expression.
Yet possibly

you may understand me.
Tears and laughter!...
How good you are, Makar

Alexievitch!
Yesterday you looked into my eyes as though you could

read in them all that I was feeling--as though you were rejoicing at my

happiness.
Whether it were a group of shrubs or an alleyway or a vista

of water that we were passing, you would halt before me, and stand

gazing at my face as though you were showing me possessions of your own.
It told me how kind is your nature, and I love you for it.
Today I am

again unwell, for yesterday I wetted my feet, and took a chill.
Thedora

also is unwell; both of us are ailing.
Do not forget me.
Come and see me

as often as you can.--Your own,



BARBARA ALEXIEVNA.
June 12th.
MY DEAREST BARBARA ALEXIEVNA--I had supposed that you meant to describe

our doings of the other day in verse; yet from you there has arrived

only a single sheet of writing.
Nevertheless, I must say that, little

though you have put into your letter, that little is not expressed with

rare beauty and grace.
Nature, your descriptions of rural scenes, your

analysis of your own feelings--the whole is beautifully written.
Alas,

I have no such talent!
Though I may fill a score of pages, nothing comes

of it--I might as well never have put pen to paper.
Yes, this I know

from experience.
You say, my darling, that I am kind and good, that I could not harm

my fellow-men, that I have power to comprehend the goodness of God

(as expressed in nature’s handiwork), and so on.
It may all be so, my

dearest one--it may all be exactly as you say.
Indeed, I think that you

are right.
But if so, the reason is that when one reads such a letter

as you have just sent me, one’s heart involuntarily softens, and

affords entrance to thoughts of a graver and weightier order.
Listen, my

darling; I have something to tell you, my beloved one.
I will begin from the time when I was seventeen years old and first

entered the service--though I shall soon have completed my thirtieth

year of official activity.
I may say that at first I was much pleased

with my new uniform; and, as I grew older, I grew in mind, and fell

to studying my fellow-men.
Likewise I may say that I lived an upright

life--so much so that at last I incurred persecution.
This you may not

believe, but it is true.
To think that men so cruel should exist!
For

though, dearest one, I am dull and of no account, I have feelings like

everyone else.
Consequently, would you believe it, Barbara, when I

tell you what these cruel fellows did to me?
I feel ashamed to tell

it you--and all because I was of a quiet, peaceful, good-natured

disposition!
Things began with “this or that, Makar Alexievitch, is your

fault.” Then it went on to “I need hardly say that the fault is wholly Makar

Alexievitch’s.” Finally it became “OF COURSE Makar Alexievitch is to

blame.” Do you see the sequence of things, my darling?
Every mistake

was attributed to me, until “Makar Alexievitch” became a byword in our

department.
Also, while making of me a proverb, these fellows could not

give me a smile or a civil word.
They found fault with my boots, with

my uniform, with my hair, with my figure.
None of these things were to

their taste: everything had to be changed.
And so it has been from

that day to this.
True, I have now grown used to it, for I can

grow accustomed to anything (being, as you know, a man of peaceable

disposition, like all men of small stature)--yet why should these things

be?
Whom have I harmed?
Whom have I ever supplanted?
Whom have I ever

traduced to his superiors?
No, the fault is that more than once I have

asked for an increase of salary.
But have I ever CABALLED for it?
No,

you would be wrong in thinking so, my dearest one.
HOW could I ever

have done so?
You yourself have had many opportunities of seeing how

incapable I am of deceit or chicanery.
Why then, should this have fallen

to my lot?...
However, since you think me worthy of respect, my darling,

I do not care, for you are far and away the best person in the world....

What do you consider to be the greatest social virtue?
In private

conversation Evstafi Ivanovitch once told me that the greatest social

virtue might be considered to be an ability to get money to spend.
Also,

my comrades used jestingly (yes, I know only jestingly) to propound the

ethical maxim that a man ought never to let himself become a burden upon

anyone.
Well, I am a burden upon no one.
It is my own crust of bread

that I eat; and though that crust is but a poor one, and sometimes

actually a maggoty one, it has at least been EARNED, and therefore, is

being put to a right and lawful use.
What therefore, ought I to do?
I

know that I can earn but little by my labours as a copyist; yet even of

that little I am proud, for it has entailed WORK, and has wrung sweat

from my brow.
What harm is there in being a copyist?
“He is only an

amanuensis,” people say of me.
But what is there so disgraceful in that?
My writing is at least legible, neat, and pleasant to look upon--and his

Excellency is satisfied with it.
Indeed, I transcribe many important

documents.
At the same time, I know that my writing lacks STYLE, which

is why I have never risen in the service.
Even to you, my dear one, I

write simply and without tricks, but just as a thought may happen to

enter my head.
Yes, I know all this; but if everyone were to become a

fine writer, who would there be left to act as copyists?...
Whatsoever

questions I may put to you in my letters, dearest, I pray you to answer

them.
I am sure that you need me, that I can be of use to you; and,

since that is so, I must not allow myself to be distracted by any

trifle.
Even if I be likened to a rat, I do not care, provided that that

particular rat be wanted by you, and be of use in the world, and be

retained in its position, and receive its reward.
But what a rat it is!
Enough of this, dearest one.
I ought not to have spoken of it, but I

lost my temper.
Still, it is pleasant to speak the truth sometimes.
Goodbye, my own, my darling, my sweet little comforter!
I will come to

you soon--yes, I will certainly come to you.
Until I do so, do not fret

yourself.
With me I shall be bringing a book.
Once more goodbye.--Your

heartfelt well-wisher,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
June 20th.
MY DEAREST MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH--I am writing to you post-haste--I am

hurrying my utmost to get my work finished in time.
What do you suppose

is the reason for this?
It is because an opportunity has occurred for

you to make a splendid purchase.
Thedora tells me that a retired civil

servant of her acquaintance has a uniform to sell--one cut to regulation

pattern and in good repair, as well as likely to go very cheap.
Now, DO

not tell me that you have not got the money, for I know from your own

lips that you HAVE.
Use that money, I pray you, and do not hoard it.
See

what terrible garments you walk about in!
They are shameful--they are

patched all over!
In fact, you have nothing new whatever.
That this is

so, I know for certain, and I care not WHAT you tell me about it.
So

listen to me for once, and buy this uniform.
Do it for MY sake.
Do it to

show that you really love me.
You have sent me some linen as a gift.
But listen to me, Makar

Alexievitch.
You are simply ruining yourself.
Is it a jest that you

should spend so much money, such a terrible amount of money, upon me?
How you love to play the spendthrift!
I tell you that I do not need it,

that such expenditure is unnecessary.
I know, I am CERTAIN, that you

love me--therefore, it is useless to remind me of the fact with gifts.
Nor do I like receiving them, since I know how much they must have cost

you.
No--put your money to a better use.
I beg, I beseech of you, to

do so.
Also, you ask me to send you a continuation of my memoirs--to

conclude them.
But I know not how I contrived even to write as much of

them as I did; and now I have not the strength to write further of my

past, nor the desire to give it a single thought.
Such recollections are

terrible to me.
Most difficult of all is it for me to speak of my poor

mother, who left her destitute daughter a prey to villains.
My heart

runs blood whenever I think of it; it is so fresh in my memory that

I cannot dismiss it from my thoughts, nor rest for its insistence,

although a year has now elapsed since the events took place.
But all

this you know.
Also, I have told you what Anna Thedorovna is now intending.
She accuses

me of ingratitude, and denies the accusations made against herself with

regard to Monsieur Bwikov.
Also, she keeps sending for me, and telling

me that I have taken to evil courses, but that if I will return to her,

she will smooth over matters with Bwikov, and force him to confess his

fault.
Also, she says that he desires to give me a dowry.
Away with them

all!
I am quite happy here with you and good Thedora, whose devotion to

me reminds me of my old nurse, long since dead.
Distant kinsman though

you may be, I pray you always to defend my honour.
Other people I do

not wish to know, and would gladly forget if I could.... What are they

wanting with me now?
Thedora declares it all to be a trick, and says

that in time they will leave me alone.
God grant it be so!
B. D.









June 21st.
MY OWN, MY DARLING,--I wish to write to you, yet know not where to

begin.
Things are as strange as though we were actually living together.
Also I would add that never in my life have I passed such happy days as

I am spending at present.
‘Tis as though God had blessed me with a home

and a family of my own!
Yes, you are my little daughter, beloved.
But

why mention the four sorry roubles that I sent you?
You needed them;

I know that from Thedora herself, and it will always be a particular

pleasure to me to gratify you in anything.
It will always be my one

happiness in life.
Pray, therefore, leave me that happiness, and do

not seek to cross me in it.
Things are not as you suppose.
I have now

reached the sunshine since, in the first place, I am living so close to

you as almost to be with you (which is a great consolation to my mind),

while, in the second place, a neighbour of mine named Rataziaev (the

retired official who gives the literary parties) has today invited me

to tea.
This evening, therefore, there will be a gathering at which we

shall discuss literature!
Think of that my darling!
Well, goodbye now.
I have written this without any definite aim in my mind, but solely to

assure you of my welfare.
Through Theresa I have received your message

that you need an embroidered cloak to wear, so I will go and purchase

one.
Yes, tomorrow I mean to purchase that embroidered cloak, and so

give myself the pleasure of having satisfied one of your wants.
I know

where to go for such a garment.
For the time being I remain your sincere

friend,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
June 22nd.
MY DEAREST BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--I have to tell you that a sad event

has happened in this house--an event to excite one’s utmost pity.
This morning, about five o’clock, one of Gorshkov’s children died of

scarlatina, or something of the kind.
I have been to pay the parents

a visit of condolence, and found them living in the direst poverty and

disorder.
Nor is that surprising, seeing that the family lives in a

single room, with only a screen to divide it for decency’s sake.
Already

the coffin was standing in their midst--a plain but decent shell which

had been bought ready-made.
The child, they told me, had been a boy of

nine, and full of promise.
What a pitiful spectacle!
Though not weeping,

the mother, poor woman, looked broken with grief.
After all, to have one

burden the less on their shoulders may prove a relief, though there are

still two children left--a babe at the breast and a little girl of six!
How painful to see these suffering children, and to be unable to help

them!
The father, clad in an old, dirty frockcoat, was seated on a

dilapidated chair.
Down his cheeks there were coursing tears--though

less through grief than owing to a long-standing affliction of the eyes.
He was so thin, too!
Always he reddens in the face when he is addressed,

and becomes too confused to answer.
A little girl, his daughter, was

leaning against the coffin--her face looking so worn and thoughtful,

poor mite!
Do you know, I cannot bear to see a child look thoughtful.
On the floor there lay a rag doll, but she was not playing with it as,

motionless, she stood there with her finger to her lips.
Even a bon-bon

which the landlady had given her she was not eating.
Is it not all sad,

sad, Barbara?
MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
June 25th.
MY BELOVED MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH--I return you your book.
In my opinion it

is a worthless one, and I would rather not have it in my possession.
Why do you save up your money to buy such trash?
Except in jest, do

such books really please you?
However, you have now promised to send me

something else to read.
I will share the cost of it.
Now, farewell until

we meet again.
I have nothing more to say.
B. D.









June 26th.
MY DEAR LITTLE BARBARA--To tell you the truth, I myself have not read

the book of which you speak.
That is to say, though I began to read it,

I soon saw that it was nonsense, and written only to make people laugh.
“However,” thought I, “it is at least a CHEERFUL work, and so may please

Barbara.” That is why I sent it you.
Rataziaev has now promised to give me something really literary to read;

so you shall soon have your book, my darling.
He is a man who reflects;

he is a clever fellow, as well as himself a writer--such a writer!
His

pen glides along with ease, and in such a style (even when he is writing

the most ordinary, the most insignificant of articles) that I have often

remarked upon the fact, both to Phaldoni and to Theresa.
Often, too, I

go to spend an evening with him.
He reads aloud to us until five o’clock

in the morning, and we listen to him.
It is a revelation of things

rather than a reading.
It is charming, it is like a bouquet of

flowers--there is a bouquet of flowers in every line of each page.
Besides, he is such an approachable, courteous, kind-hearted fellow!
What am I compared with him?
Why, nothing, simply nothing!
He is a

man of reputation, whereas I--well, I do not exist at all.
Yet he

condescends to my level.
At this very moment I am copying out a

document for him.
But you must not think that he finds any DIFFICULTY in

condescending to me, who am only a copyist.
No, you must not believe the

base gossip that you may hear.
I do copying work for him simply in order

to please myself, as well as that he may notice me--a thing that always

gives me pleasure.
I appreciate the delicacy of his position.
He is a

good--a very good--man, and an unapproachable writer.
What a splendid thing is literature, Barbara--what a splendid thing!
This I learnt before I had known Rataziaev even for three days.
It

strengthens and instructs the heart of man.... No matter what there be

in the world, you will find it all written down in Rataziaev’s works.
And so well written down, too!
Literature is a sort of picture--a sort

of picture or mirror.
It connotes at once passion, expression, fine

criticism, good learning, and a document.
Yes, I have learned this from

Rataziaev himself.
I can assure you, Barbara, that if only you could be

sitting among us, and listening to the talk (while, with the rest of us,

you smoked a pipe), and were to hear those present begin to argue

and dispute concerning different matters, you would feel of as little

account among them as I do; for I myself figure there only as a

blockhead, and feel ashamed, since it takes me a whole evening to think

of a single word to interpolate--and even then the word will not come!
In a case like that a man regrets that, as the proverb has it, he should

have reached man’s estate but not man’s understanding.... What do I

do in my spare time?
I sleep like a fool, though I would far rather be

occupied with something else--say, with eating or writing, since the one

is useful to oneself, and the other is beneficial to one’s fellows.
You

should see how much money these fellows contrive to save!
How much, for

instance, does not Rataziaev lay by?
A few days’ writing, I am told, can

earn him as much as three hundred roubles!
Indeed, if a man be a writer

of short stories or anything else that is interesting, he can sometimes

pocket five hundred roubles, or a thousand, at a time!
Think of it,

Barbara!
Rataziaev has by him a small manuscript of verses, and for it

he is asking--what do you think?
Seven thousand roubles!
Why, one could

buy a whole house for that sum!
He has even refused five thousand for a

manuscript, and on that occasion I reasoned with him, and advised him

to accept the five thousand.
But it was of no use.
“For,” said he, “they

will soon offer me seven thousand,” and kept to his point, for he is a

man of some determination.
Suppose, now, that I were to give you an extract from “Passion in Italy”

 (as another work of his is called).
Read this, dearest Barbara, and

judge for yourself:



“Vladimir started, for in his veins the lust of passion had welled until

it had reached boiling point.
“‘Countess,’ he cried, ‘do you know how terrible is this adoration of

mine, how infinite this madness?
No!
My fancies have not deceived me--I

love you ecstatically, diabolically, as a madman might!
All the blood

that is in your husband’s body could never quench the furious,

surging rapture that is in my soul!
No puny obstacle could thwart the

all-destroying, infernal flame which is eating into my exhausted breast!
Oh Zinaida, my Zinaida!’



“‘Vladimir!’ she whispered, almost beside herself, as she sank upon his

bosom.
“‘My Zinaida!’ cried the enraptured Smileski once more.
“His breath was coming in sharp, broken pants.
The lamp of love was

burning brightly on the altar of passion, and searing the hearts of the

two unfortunate sufferers.
“‘Vladimir!’ again she whispered in her intoxication, while her bosom

heaved, her cheeks glowed, and her eyes flashed fire.
“Thus was a new and dread union consummated.
“Half an hour later the aged Count entered his wife’s boudoir.
“‘How now, my love?’ said he.
‘Surely it is for some welcome guest

beyond the common that you have had the samovar [Tea-urn.]
thus

prepared?’ And he smote her lightly on the cheek.”



What think you of THAT, Barbara?
True, it is a little too

outspoken--there can be no doubt of that; yet how grand it is, how

splendid!
With your permission I will also quote you an extract from

Rataziaev’s story, Ermak and Zuleika:



“‘You love me, Zuleika?
Say again that you love me, you love me!’



“‘I DO love you, Ermak,’ whispered Zuleika.
“‘Then by heaven and earth I thank you!
By heaven and earth you have

made me happy!
You have given me all, all that my tortured soul has

for immemorial years been seeking!
‘Tis for this that you have led me

hither, my guiding star--‘tis for this that you have conducted me to

the Girdle of Stone!
To all the world will I now show my Zuleika, and

no man, demon or monster of Hell, shall bid me nay!
Oh, if men would but

understand the mysterious passions of her tender heart, and see the poem

which lurks in each of her little tears!
Suffer me to dry those tears

with my kisses!
Suffer me to drink of those heavenly drops, Oh being who

art not of this earth!’



“‘Ermak,’ said Zuleika, ‘the world is cruel, and men are unjust.
But

LET them drive us from their midst--let them judge us, my beloved Ermak!
What has a poor maiden who was reared amid the snows of Siberia to do

with their cold, icy, self-sufficient world?
Men cannot understand me,

my darling, my sweetheart.’



“‘Is that so?
Then shall the sword of the Cossacks sing and whistle over

their heads!’ cried Ermak with a furious look in his eyes.”



What must Ermak have felt when he learnt that his Zuleika had been

murdered, Barbara?--that, taking advantages of the cover of night, the

blind old Kouchoum had, in Ermak’s absence, broken into the latter’s

tent, and stabbed his own daughter in mistake for the man who had robbed

him of sceptre and crown?
“‘Oh that I had a stone whereon to whet my sword!’ cried Ermak in the

madness of his wrath as he strove to sharpen his steel blade upon the

enchanted rock.
‘I would have his blood, his blood!
I would tear him

limb from limb, the villain!’”



Then Ermak, unable to survive the loss of his Zuleika, throws himself

into the Irtisch, and the tale comes to an end.
Here, again, is another short extract--this time written in a more

comical vein, to make people laugh:



“Do you know Ivan Prokofievitch Zheltopuzh?
He is the man who took a

piece out of Prokofi Ivanovitch’s leg.
Ivan’s character is one of the

rugged order, and therefore, one that is rather lacking in virtue.
Yet he has a passionate relish for radishes and honey.
Once he also

possessed a friend named Pelagea Antonovna.
Do you know Pelagea

Antonovna?
She is the woman who always puts on her petticoat wrong side

outwards.”



What humour, Barbara--what purest humour!
We rocked with laughter when

he read it aloud to us.
Yes, that is the kind of man he is.
Possibly the

passage is a trifle over-frolicsome, but at least it is harmless, and

contains no freethought or liberal ideas.
In passing, I may say that

Rataziaev is not only a supreme writer, but also a man of upright

life--which is more than can be said for most writers.
What, do you think, is an idea that sometimes enters my head?
In fact,

what if I myself were to write something?
How if suddenly a book were

to make its appearance in the world bearing the title of “The Poetical

Works of Makar Dievushkin”?
What THEN, my angel?
How should you view,

should you receive, such an event?
I may say of myself that never, after

my book had appeared, should I have the hardihood to show my face on

the Nevski Prospect; for would it not be too dreadful to hear every

one saying, “Here comes the literateur and poet, Dievushkin--yes, it is

Dievushkin himself.” What, in such a case, should I do with my feet (for

I may tell you that almost always my shoes are patched, or have just

been resoled, and therefore look anything but becoming)?
To think that

the great writer Dievushkin should walk about in patched footgear!
If

a duchess or a countess should recognise me, what would she say, poor

woman?
Perhaps, though, she would not notice my shoes at all, since

it may reasonably be supposed that countesses do not greatly occupy

themselves with footgear, especially with the footgear of civil service

officials (footgear may differ from footgear, it must be remembered).
Besides, I should find that the countess had heard all about me, for

my friends would have betrayed me to her--Rataziaev among the first of

them, seeing that he often goes to visit Countess V., and practically

lives at her house.
She is said to be a woman of great intellect and

wit.
An artful dog, that Rataziaev!
But enough of this.
I write this sort of thing both to amuse myself and

to divert your thoughts.
Goodbye now, my angel.
This is a long epistle

that I am sending you, but the reason is that today I feel in good

spirits after dining at Rataziaev’s.
There I came across a novel which I

hardly know how to describe to you.
Do not think the worse of me on that

account, even though I bring you another book instead (for I certainly

mean to bring one).
The novel in question was one of Paul de Kock’s, and

not a novel for you to read.
No, no!
Such a work is unfit for your

eyes.
In fact, it is said to have greatly offended the critics of St.

Petersburg.
Also, I am sending you a pound of bonbons--bought specially

for yourself.
Each time that you eat one, beloved, remember the sender.
Only, do not bite the iced ones, but suck them gently, lest they make

your teeth ache.
Perhaps, too, you like comfits?
Well, write and tell

me if it is so.
Goodbye, goodbye.
Christ watch over you, my

darling!--Always your faithful friend,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
June 27th.
MY DEAREST MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH--Thedora tells me that, should I wish,

there are some people who will be glad to help me by obtaining me an

excellent post as governess in a certain house.
What think you, my

friend?
Shall I go or not?
Of course, I should then cease to be a burden

to you, and the post appears to be a comfortable one.
On the other hand,

the idea of entering a strange house appals me.
The people in it are

landed gentry, and they will begin to ask me questions, and to busy

themselves about me.
What answers shall I then return?
You see, I am now

so unused to society--so shy!
I like to live in a corner to which I have

long grown used.
Yes, the place with which one is familiar is always the

best.
Even if for companion one has but sorrow, that place will still be

the best.... God alone knows what duties the post will entail.
Perhaps

I shall merely be required to act as nursemaid; and in any case, I hear

that the governess there has been changed three times in two years.
For

God’s sake, Makar Alexievitch, advise me whether to go or not.
Why do

you never come near me now?
Do let my eyes have an occasional sight of

you.
Mass on Sundays is almost the only time when we see one another.
How retiring you have become!
So also have I, even though, in a way, I

am your kinswoman.
You must have ceased to love me, Makar Alexievitch.
I

spend many a weary hour because of it.
Sometimes, when dusk is falling,

I find myself lonely--oh, so lonely!
Thedora has gone out somewhere, and

I sit here and think, and think, and think.
I remember all the past, its

joys and its sorrows.
It passes before my eyes in detail, it glimmers at

me as out of a mist; and as it does so, well-known faces appear, which

seem actually to be present with me in this room!
Most frequently of

all, I see my mother.
Ah, the dreams that come to me!
I feel that my

health is breaking, so weak am I.
When this morning I arose, sickness

took me until I vomited and vomited.
Yes, I feel, I know, that death is

approaching.
Who will bury me when it has come?
Who will visit my tomb?
Who will sorrow for me?
And now it is in a strange place, in the house

of a stranger, that I may have to die!
Yes, in a corner which I do not

know!...
My God, how sad a thing is life!...
Why do you send me comfits

to eat?
Whence do you get the money to buy them?
Ah, for God’s sake keep

the money, keep the money.
Thedora has sold a carpet which I have made.
She got fifty roubles for it, which is very good--I had expected less.
Of the fifty roubles I shall give Thedora three, and with the remainder

make myself a plain, warm dress.
Also, I am going to make you a

waistcoat--to make it myself, and out of good material.
Also, Thedora has brought me a book--“The Stories of Bielkin”--which I

will forward you, if you would care to read it.
Only, do not soil it,

nor yet retain it, for it does not belong to me.
It is by Pushkin.
Two

years ago I read these stories with my mother, and it would hurt me

to read them again.
If you yourself have any books, pray let me have

them--so long as they have not been obtained from Rataziaev.
Probably he

will be giving you one of his own works when he has had one printed.
How

is it that his compositions please you so much, Makar Alexievitch?
I

think them SUCH rubbish!--Now goodbye.
How I have been chattering on!
When feeling sad, I always like to talk of something, for it acts upon

me like medicine--I begin to feel easier as soon as I have uttered what

is preying upon my heart.
Good bye, good-bye, my friend--Your own



B. D.









June 28th.
MY DEAREST BARBARA ALEXIEVNA--Away with melancholy!
Really, beloved,

you ought to be ashamed of yourself!
How can you allow such thoughts to

enter your head?
Really and truly you are quite well; really and truly

you are, my darling.
Why, you are blooming--simply blooming.
True, I see

a certain touch of pallor in your face, but still you are blooming.
A

fig for dreams and visions!
Yes, for shame, dearest!
Drive away those

fancies; try to despise them.
Why do I sleep so well?
Why am I never

ailing?
Look at ME, beloved.
I live well, I sleep peacefully, I retain

my health, I can ruffle it with my juniors.
In fact, it is a pleasure

to see me.
Come, come, then, sweetheart!
Let us have no more of this.
I know that that little head of yours is capable of any fancy--that all

too easily you take to dreaming and repining; but for my sake, cease to

do so.
Are you to go to these people, you ask me?
Never!
No, no, again no!
How

could you think of doing such a thing as taking a journey?
I will not

allow it--I intend to combat your intention with all my might.
I will

sell my frockcoat, and walk the streets in my shirt sleeves, rather than

let you be in want.
But no, Barbara.
I know you, I know you.
This is

merely a trick, merely a trick.
And probably Thedora alone is to

blame for it.
She appears to be a foolish old woman, and to be able to

persuade you to do anything.
Do not believe her, my dearest.
I am sure

that you know what is what, as well as SHE does.
Eh, sweetheart?
She is

a stupid, quarrelsome, rubbish-talking old woman who brought her late

husband to the grave.
Probably she has been plaguing you as much as she

did him.
No, no, dearest; you must not take this step.
What should I do

then?
What would there be left for ME to do?
Pray put the idea out

of your head.
What is it you lack here?
I cannot feel sufficiently

overjoyed to be near you, while, for your part, you love me well, and

can live your life here as quietly as you wish.
Read or sew, whichever

you like--or read and do not sew.
Only, do not desert me.
Try, yourself,

to imagine how things would seem after you had gone.
Here am I sending

you books, and later we will go for a walk.
Come, come, then, my

Barbara!
Summon to your aid your reason, and cease to babble of trifles.
As soon as I can I will come and see you, and then you shall tell me the

whole story.
This will not do, sweetheart; this certainly will not do.
Of course, I know that I am not an educated man, and have received but a

sorry schooling, and have had no inclination for it, and think too much

of Rataziaev, if you will; but he is my friend, and therefore, I must

put in a word or two for him.
Yes, he is a splendid writer.
Again and

again I assert that he writes magnificently.
I do not agree with

you about his works, and never shall.
He writes too ornately, too

laconically, with too great a wealth of imagery and imagination.
Perhaps

you have read him without insight, Barbara?
Or perhaps you were out of

spirits at the time, or angry with Thedora about something, or worried

about some mischance?
Ah, but you should read him sympathetically, and,

best of all, at a time when you are feeling happy and contented and

pleasantly disposed--for instance, when you have a bonbon or two in your

mouth.
Yes, that is the way to read Rataziaev.
I do not dispute (indeed,

who would do so?)
that better writers than he exist--even far better;

but they are good, and he is good too--they write well, and he writes

well.
It is chiefly for his own sake that he writes, and he is to be

approved for so doing.
Now goodbye, dearest.
More I cannot write, for I must hurry away to

business.
Be of good cheer, and the Lord God watch over you!--Your

faithful friend,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
P.S--Thank you so much for the book, darling!
I will read it through,

this volume of Pushkin, and tonight come to you.
MY DEAR MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH--No, no, my friend, I must not go on living

near you.
I have been thinking the matter over, and come to the

conclusion that I should be doing very wrong to refuse so good a post.
I

should at least have an assured crust of bread; I might at least set to

work to earn my employers’ favour, and even try to change my character

if required to do so.
Of course it is a sad and sorry thing to have to

live among strangers, and to be forced to seek their patronage, and to

conceal and constrain one’s own personality--but God will help me.
I

must not remain forever a recluse, for similar chances have come my way

before.
I remember how, when a little girl at school, I used to go home

on Sundays and spend the time in frisking and dancing about.
Sometimes

my mother would chide me for so doing, but I did not care, for my heart

was too joyous, and my spirits too buoyant, for that.
Yet as the evening

of Sunday came on, a sadness as of death would overtake me, for at nine

o’clock I had to return to school, where everything was cold and strange

and severe--where the governesses, on Mondays, lost their tempers, and

nipped my ears, and made me cry.
On such occasions I would retire to a

corner and weep alone; concealing my tears lest I should be called lazy.
Yet it was not because I had to study that I used to weep, and in time I

grew more used to things, and, after my schooldays were over, shed tears

only when I was parting with friends...
It is not right for me to live

in dependence upon you.
The thought tortures me.
I tell you this

frankly, for the reason that frankness with you has become a habit.
Cannot I see that daily, at earliest dawn, Thedora rises to do washing

and scrubbing, and remains working at it until late at night, even

though her poor old bones must be aching for want of rest?
Cannot I also

see that YOU are ruining yourself for me, and hoarding your last kopeck

that you may spend it on my behalf?
You ought not so to act, my friend,

even though you write that you would rather sell your all than let me

want for anything.
I believe in you, my friend--I entirely believe in

your good heart; but, you say that to me now (when, perhaps, you have

received some unexpected sum or gratuity) and there is still the future

to be thought of.
You yourself know that I am always ailing--that I

cannot work as you do, glad though I should be of any work if I could

get it; so what else is there for me to do?
To sit and repine as I watch

you and Thedora?
But how would that be of any use to you?
AM I necessary

to you, comrade of mine?
HAVE I ever done you any good?
Though I am

bound to you with my whole soul, and love you dearly and strongly and

wholeheartedly, a bitter fate has ordained that that love should be all

that I have to give--that I should be unable, by creating for you

subsistence, to repay you for all your kindness.
Do not, therefore,

detain me longer, but think the matter out, and give me your opinion on

it.
In expectation of which I remain your sweetheart,



B. D.









July 1st.
Rubbish, rubbish, Barbara!--What you say is sheer rubbish.
Stay here,

rather, and put such thoughts out of your head.
None of what you suppose

is true.
I can see for myself that it is not.
Whatsoever you lack here,

you have but to ask me for it.
Here you love and are loved, and we might

easily be happy and contented together.
What could you want more?
What

have you to do with strangers?
You cannot possibly know what strangers

are like.
I know it, though, and could have told you if you had asked

me.
There is a stranger whom I know, and whose bread I have eaten.
He

is a cruel man, Barbara--a man so bad that he would be unworthy of your

little heart, and would soon tear it to pieces with his railings and

reproaches and black looks.
On the other hand, you are safe and well

here--you are as safe as though you were sheltered in a nest.
Besides,

you would, as it were, leave me with my head gone.
For what should I

have to do when you were gone?
What could I, an old man, find to do?
Are

you not necessary to me?
Are you not useful to me?
Eh?
Surely you do not

think that you are not useful?
You are of great use to me, Barbara, for

you exercise a beneficial influence upon my life.
Even at this moment,

as I think of you, I feel cheered, for always I can write letters to

you, and put into them what I am feeling, and receive from you detailed

answers....
I have bought you a wardrobe, and also procured you a

bonnet; so you see that you have only to give me a commission for it to

be executed.... No--in what way are you not useful?
What should I do

if I were deserted in my old age?
What would become of me?
Perhaps you

never thought of that, Barbara--perhaps you never said to yourself, “How

could HE get on without me?” You see, I have grown so accustomed to you.
What else would it end in, if you were to go away?
Why, in my hiking to

the Neva’s bank and doing away with myself.
Ah, Barbara, darling, I

can see that you want me to be taken away to the Volkovo Cemetery in

a broken-down old hearse, with some poor outcast of the streets to

accompany my coffin as chief mourner, and the gravediggers to heap my

body with clay, and depart and leave me there.
How wrong of you, how

wrong of you, my beloved!
Yes, by heavens, how wrong of you!
I am

returning you your book, little friend; and, if you were to ask of me

my opinion of it, I should say that never before in my life had I read

a book so splendid.
I keep wondering how I have hitherto contrived to

remain such an owl.
For what have I ever done?
From what wilds did

I spring into existence?
I KNOW nothing--I know simply NOTHING.
My

ignorance is complete.
Frankly, I am not an educated man, for until now

I have read scarcely a single book--only “A Portrait of Man” (a clever

enough work in its way), “The Boy Who Could Play Many Tunes Upon Bells”,

and “Ivik’s Storks”.
That is all.
But now I have also read “The Station

Overseer” in your little volume; and it is wonderful to think that one

may live and yet be ignorant of the fact that under one’s very nose

there may be a book in which one’s whole life is described as in a

picture.
Never should I have guessed that, as soon as ever one begins to

read such a book, it sets one on both to remember and to consider and to

foretell events.
Another reason why I liked this book so much is that,

though, in the case of other works (however clever they be), one may

read them, yet remember not a word of them (for I am a man naturally

dull of comprehension, and unable to read works of any great

importance),--although, as I say, one may read such works, one reads

such a book as YOURS as easily as though it had been written by oneself,

and had taken possession of one’s heart, and turned it inside out for

inspection, and were describing it in detail as a matter of perfect

simplicity.
Why, I might almost have written the book myself!
Why not,

indeed?
I can feel just as the people in the book do, and find myself

in positions precisely similar to those of, say, the character Samson

Virin.
In fact, how many good-hearted wretches like Virin are there not

walking about amongst us?
How easily, too, it is all described!
I assure

you, my darling, that I almost shed tears when I read that Virin so took

to drink as to lose his memory, become morose, and spend whole days over

his liquor; as also that he choked with grief and wept bitterly when,

rubbing his eyes with his dirty hand, he bethought him of his wandering

lamb, his daughter Dunasha!
How natural, how natural!
You should read

the book for yourself.
The thing is actually alive.
Even I can see that;

even I can realise that it is a picture cut from the very life around

me.
In it I see our own Theresa (to go no further) and the poor

tchinovnik--who is just such a man as this Samson Virin, except for

his surname of Gorshkov.
The book describes just what might happen to

ourselves--to myself in particular.
Even a count who lives in the Nevski

Prospect or in Naberezhnaia Street might have a similar experience,

though he might APPEAR to be different, owing to the fact that his life

is cast on a higher plane.
Yes, just the same things might happen to

him--just the same things....
Here you are wishing to go away and leave

us; yet, be careful lest it would not be I who had to pay the penalty of

your doing so.
For you might ruin both yourself and me.
For the love of

God, put away these thoughts from you, my darling, and do not torture me

in vain.
How could you, my poor little unfledged nestling, find yourself

food, and defend yourself from misfortune, and ward off the wiles of

evil men?
Think better of it, Barbara, and pay no more heed to

foolish advice and calumny, but read your book again, and read it with

attention.
It may do you much good.
I have spoken of Rataziaev’s “The Station Overseer”.
However, the author

has told me that the work is old-fashioned, since, nowadays, books are

issued with illustrations and embellishments of different sorts (though

I could not make out all that he said).
Pushkin he adjudges a splendid

poet, and one who has done honour to Holy Russia.
Read your book again,

Barbara, and follow my advice, and make an old man happy.
The Lord God

Himself will reward you.
Yes, He will surely reward you.--Your faithful

friend,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
MY DEAREST MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--Today Thedora came to me with fifteen

roubles in silver.
How glad was the poor woman when I gave her three of

them!
I am writing to you in great haste, for I am busy cutting out a

waistcoat to send to you--buff, with a pattern of flowers.
Also I

am sending you a book of stories; some of which I have read myself,

particularly one called “The Cloak.” ... You invite me to go to the

theatre with you.
But will it not cost too much?
Of course we might sit

in the gallery.
It is a long time (indeed I cannot remember when I last

did so) since I visited a theatre!
Yet I cannot help fearing that such

an amusement is beyond our means.
Thedora keeps nodding her head, and

saying that you have taken to living above your income.
I myself divine

the same thing by the amount which you have spent upon me.
Take care,

dear friend, that misfortune does not come of it, for Thedora has also

informed me of certain rumours concerning your inability to meet your

landlady’s bills.
In fact, I am very anxious about you.
Now, goodbye,

for I must hasten away to see about another matter--about the changing

of the ribands on my bonnet.
P.S.--Do you know, if we go to the theatre, I think that I shall wear my

new hat and black mantilla.
Will that not look nice?
July 7th.
MY DEAREST BARBARA ALEXIEVNA--SO much for yesterday!
Yes, dearest, we

have both been caught playing the fool, for I have become thoroughly

bitten with the actress of whom I spoke.
Last night I listened to her

with all my ears, although, strangely enough, it was practically my

first sight of her, seeing that only once before had I been to the

theatre.
In those days I lived cheek by jowl with a party of five young

men--a most noisy crew--and one night I accompanied them, willy-nilly,

to the theatre, though I held myself decently aloof from their doings,

and only assisted them for company’s sake.
How those fellows talked to

me of this actress!
Every night when the theatre was open, the entire

band of them (they always seemed to possess the requisite money) would

betake themselves to that place of entertainment, where they ascended

to the gallery, and clapped their hands, and repeatedly recalled the

actress in question.
In fact, they went simply mad over her.
Even after

we had returned home they would give me no rest, but would go on

talking about her all night, and calling her their Glasha, and declaring

themselves to be in love with “the canary-bird of their hearts.” My

defenseless self, too, they would plague about the woman, for I was as

young as they.
What a figure I must have cut with them on the fourth

tier of the gallery!
Yet, I never got a sight of more than just a corner

of the curtain, but had to content myself with listening.
She had a

fine, resounding, mellow voice like a nightingale’s, and we all of us

used to clap our hands loudly, and to shout at the top of our lungs.
In

short, we came very near to being ejected.
On the first occasion I went

home walking as in a mist, with a single rouble left in my pocket, and

an interval of ten clear days confronting me before next pay-day.
Yet,

what think you, dearest?
The very next day, before going to work, I

called at a French perfumer’s, and spent my whole remaining capital on

some eau-de-Cologne and scented soap!
Why I did so I do not know.
Nor

did I dine at home that day, but kept walking and walking past her

windows (she lived in a fourth-storey flat on the Nevski Prospect).
At length I returned to my own lodging, but only to rest a short hour

before again setting off to the Nevski Prospect and resuming my vigil

before her windows.
For a month and a half I kept this up--dangling in

her train.
Sometimes I would hire cabs, and discharge them in view of

her abode; until at length I had entirely ruined myself, and got into

debt.
Then I fell out of love with her--I grew weary of the pursuit....

You see, therefore, to what depths an actress can reduce a decent man.
In those days I was young.
Yes, in those days I was VERY young.
M. D.









July 8th.
MY DEAREST BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--The book which I received from you on

the 6th of this month I now hasten to return, while at the same time

hastening also to explain matters to you in this accompanying letter.
What a misfortune, my beloved, that you should have brought me to such a

pass!
Our lots in life are apportioned by the Almighty according to our

human deserts.
To such a one He assigns a life in a general’s epaulets

or as a privy councillor--to such a one, I say, He assigns a life of

command; whereas to another one, He allots only a life of unmurmuring

toil and suffering.
These things are calculated according to a man’s

CAPACITY.
One man may be capable of one thing, and another of another,

and their several capacities are ordered by the Lord God himself.
I

have now been thirty years in the public service, and have fulfilled my

duties irreproachably, remained abstemious, and never been detected

in any unbecoming behaviour.
As a citizen, I may confess--I confess

it freely--I have been guilty of certain shortcomings; yet those

shortcomings have been combined with certain virtues.
I am respected by

my superiors, and even his Excellency has had no fault to find with me;

and though I have never been shown any special marks of favour, I know

that every one finds me at least satisfactory.
Also, my writing is

sufficiently legible and clear.
Neither too rounded nor too fine, it

is a running hand, yet always suitable.
Of our staff only Ivan

Prokofievitch writes a similar hand.
Thus have I lived till the grey

hairs of my old age; yet I can think of no serious fault committed.
Of

course, no one is free from MINOR faults.
Everyone has some of them, and

you among the rest, my beloved.
But in grave or in audacious offences

never have I been detected, nor in infringements of regulations, nor in

breaches of the public peace.
No, never!
This you surely know, even as

the author of your book must have known it.
Yes, he also must have

known it when he sat down to write.
I had not expected this of you, my

Barbara.
I should never have expected it.
What?
In future I am not to go on living peacefully in my little corner,

poor though that corner be I am not to go on living, as the proverb has

it, without muddying the water, or hurting any one, or forgetting the

fear of the Lord God and of oneself?
I am not to see, forsooth, that

no man does me an injury, or breaks into my home--I am not to take care

that all shall go well with me, or that I have clothes to wear, or that

my shoes do not require mending, or that I be given work to do, or

that I possess sufficient meat and drink?
Is it nothing that, where

the pavement is rotten, I have to walk on tiptoe to save my boots?
If I

write to you overmuch concerning myself, is it concerning ANOTHER man,

rather, that I ought to write--concerning HIS wants, concerning HIS

lack of tea to drink (and all the world needs tea)?
Has it ever been

my custom to pry into other men’s mouths, to see what is being put into

them?
Have I ever been known to offend any one in that respect?
No, no,

beloved!
Why should I desire to insult other folks when they are not

molesting ME?
Let me give you an example of what I mean.
A man may go on

slaving and slaving in the public service, and earn the respect of his

superiors (for what it is worth), and then, for no visible reason at

all, find himself made a fool of.
Of course he may break out now and

then (I am not now referring only to drunkenness), and (for example)

buy himself a new pair of shoes, and take pleasure in seeing his feet

looking well and smartly shod.
Yes, I myself have known what it is

to feel like that (I write this in good faith).
Yet I am nonetheless

astonished that Thedor Thedorovitch should neglect what is being said

about him, and take no steps to defend himself.
True, he is only a

subordinate official, and sometimes loves to rate and scold; yet why

should he not do so--why should he not indulge in a little vituperation

when he feels like it?
Suppose it to be NECESSARY, for FORM’S sake,

to scold, and to set everyone right, and to shower around abuse (for,

between ourselves, Barbara, our friend cannot get on WITHOUT abuse--so

much so that every one humours him, and does things behind his back)?
Well, since officials differ in rank, and every official demands that

he shall be allowed to abuse his fellow officials in proportion to his

rank, it follows that the TONE also of official abuse should become

divided into ranks, and thus accord with the natural order of things.
All the world is built upon the system that each one of us shall have to

yield precedence to some other one, as well as to enjoy a certain power

of abusing his fellows.
Without such a provision the world could not

get on at all, and simple chaos would ensue.
Yet I am surprised that our

Thedor should continue to overlook insults of the kind that he endures.
Why do I do my official work at all?
Why is that necessary?
Will my

doing of it lead anyone who reads it to give me a greatcoat, or to buy

me a new pair of shoes?
No, Barbara.
Men only read the documents, and

then require me to write more.
Sometimes a man will hide himself away,

and not show his face abroad, for the mere reason that, though he has

done nothing to be ashamed of, he dreads the gossip and slandering which

are everywhere to be encountered.
If his civic and family life have to

do with literature, everything will be printed and read and laughed

over and discussed; until at length, he hardly dare show his face in

the street at all, seeing that he will have been described by report as

recognisable through his gait alone!
Then, when he has amended his ways,

and grown gentler (even though he still continues to be loaded with

official work), he will come to be accounted a virtuous, decent citizen

who has deserved well of his comrades, rendered obedience to his

superiors, wished no one any evil, preserved the fear of God in his

heart, and died lamented.
Yet would it not be better, instead of letting

the poor fellow die, to give him a cloak while yet he is ALIVE--to give

it to this same Thedor Thedorovitch (that is to say, to myself)?
Yes,

‘twere far better if, on hearing the tale of his subordinate’s virtues,

the chief of the department were to call the deserving man into his

office, and then and there to promote him, and to grant him an increase

of salary.
Thus vice would be punished, virtue would prevail, and the

staff of that department would live in peace together.
Here we have an

example from everyday, commonplace life.
How, therefore, could you bring

yourself to send me that book, my beloved?
It is a badly conceived

work, Barbara, and also unreal, for the reason that in creation such

a tchinovnik does not exist.
No, again I protest against it, little

Barbara; again I protest.--Your most humble, devoted servant,



M. D.









July 27th.
MY DEAREST MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--Your latest conduct and letters had

frightened me, and left me thunderstruck and plunged in doubt, until

what you have said about Thedor explained the situation.
Why despair

and go into such frenzies, Makar Alexievitch?
Your explanations only

partially satisfy me.
Perhaps I did wrong to insist upon accepting

a good situation when it was offered me, seeing that from my last

experience in that way I derived a shock which was anything but a matter

for jesting.
You say also that your love for me has compelled you

to hide yourself in retirement.
Now, how much I am indebted to you I

realised when you told me that you were spending for my benefit the sum

which you are always reported to have laid by at your bankers; but, now

that I have learned that you never possessed such a fund, but that, on

hearing of my destitute plight, and being moved by it, you decided to

spend upon me the whole of your salary--even to forestall it--and when I

had fallen ill, actually to sell your clothes--when I learned all this

I found myself placed in the harassing position of not knowing how to

accept it all, nor what to think of it.
Ah, Makar Alexievitch!
You ought

to have stopped at your first acts of charity--acts inspired by sympathy

and the love of kinsfolk, rather than have continued to squander your

means upon what was unnecessary.
Yes, you have betrayed our friendship,

Makar Alexievitch, in that you have not been open with me; and, now that

I see that your last coin has been spent upon dresses and bon-bons and

excursions and books and visits to the theatre for me, I weep bitter

tears for my unpardonable improvidence in having accepted these things

without giving so much as a thought to your welfare.
Yes, all that you

have done to give me pleasure has become converted into a source of

grief, and left behind it only useless regret.
Of late I have remarked

that you were looking depressed; and though I felt fearful that

something unfortunate was impending, what has happened would otherwise

never have entered my head.
To think that your better sense should so

play you false, Makar Alexievitch!
What will people think of you, and

say of you?
Who will want to know you?
You whom, like everyone else, I

have valued for your goodness of heart and modesty and good sense--YOU,

I say, have now given way to an unpleasant vice of which you seem never

before to have been guilty.
What were my feelings when Thedora informed

me that you had been discovered drunk in the street, and taken home by

the police?
Why, I felt petrified with astonishment--although, in view

of the fact that you had failed me for four days, I had been expecting

some such extraordinary occurrence.
Also, have you thought what your

superiors will say of you when they come to learn the true reason of

your absence?
You say that everyone is laughing at you, that every

one has learnt of the bond which exists between us, and that your

neighbours habitually refer to me with a sneer.
Pay no attention to

this, Makar Alexievitch; for the love of God, be comforted.
Also, the

incident between you and the officers has much alarmed me, although

I had heard certain rumours concerning it.
Pray explain to me what it

means.
You write, too, that you have been afraid to be open with me, for

the reason that your confessions might lose you my friendship.
Also, you

say that you are in despair at the thought of being unable to help me in

my illness, owing to the fact that you have sold everything which might

have maintained me, and preserved me in sickness, as well as that you

have borrowed as much as it is possible for you to borrow, and are daily

experiencing unpleasantness with your landlady.
Well, in failing to

reveal all this to me you chose the worse course.
Now, however, I know

all.
You have forced me to recognise that I have been the cause of your

unhappy plight, as well as that my own conduct has brought upon myself

a twofold measure of sorrow.
The fact leaves me thunderstruck, Makar

Alexievitch.
Ah, friend, an infectious disease is indeed a misfortune,

for now we poor and miserable folk must perforce keep apart from one

another, lest the infection be increased.
Yes, I have brought upon you

calamities which never before in your humble, solitary life you had

experienced.
This tortures and exhausts me more than I can tell to think

of.
Write to me quite frankly.
Tell me how you came to embark upon such

a course of conduct.
Comfort, oh, comfort me if you can.
It is not

self-love that prompts me to speak of my own comforting, but my

friendship and love for you, which will never fade from my heart.
Goodbye.
I await your answer with impatience.
You have thought but

poorly of me, Makar Alexievitch.--Your friend and lover,



BARBARA DOBROSELOVA.
July 28th.
MY PRICELESS BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--What am I to say to you, now that all

is over, and we are gradually returning to our old position?
You say

that you are anxious as to what will be thought of me.
Let me tell you

that the dearest thing in life to me is my self-respect; wherefore, in

informing you of my misfortunes and misconduct, I would add that none

of my superiors know of my doings, nor ever will know of them, and that

therefore, I still enjoy a measure of respect in that quarter.
Only one

thing do I fear--I fear gossip.
Garrulous though my landlady be, she

said but little when, with the aid of your ten roubles, I today paid her

part of her account; and as for the rest of my companions, they do not

matter at all.
So long as I have not borrowed money from them, I need

pay them no attention.
To conclude my explanations, let me tell you

that I value your respect for me above everything in the world, and have

found it my greatest comfort during this temporary distress of mine.
Thank God, the first shock of things has abated, now that you have

agreed not to look upon me as faithless and an egotist simply because I

have deceived you.
I wish to hold you to myself, for the reason that I

cannot bear to part with you, and love you as my guardian angel....
I have now returned to work, and am applying myself diligently to my

duties.
Also, yesterday Evstafi Ivanovitch exchanged a word or two with

me.
Yet I will not conceal from you the fact that my debts are crushing

me down, and that my wardrobe is in a sorry state.
At the same time,

these things do not REALLY matter and I would bid you not despair about

them.
Send me, however, another half-rouble if you can (though that

half-rouble will stab me to the heart--stab me with the thought that it

is not I who am helping you, but YOU who are helping ME).
Thedora has

done well to get those fifteen roubles for you.
At the moment, fool of

an old man that I am, I have no hope of acquiring any more money; but as

soon as ever I do so, I will write to you and let you know all about it.
What chiefly worries me is the fear of gossip.
Goodbye, little angel.
I

kiss your hands, and beseech you to regain your health.
If this is not

a detailed letter, the reason is that I must soon be starting for the

office, in order that, by strict application to duty, I may make amends

for the past.
Further information concerning my doings (as well as

concerning that affair with the officers) must be deferred until

tonight.--Your affectionate and respectful friend,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
July 28th.
DEAREST LITTLE BARBARA,--It is YOU who have committed a fault--and one

which must weigh heavily upon your conscience.
Indeed, your last letter

has amazed and confounded me,--so much so that, on once more looking

into the recesses of my heart, I perceive that I was perfectly right

in what I did.
Of course I am not now referring to my debauch (no,

indeed!
), but to the fact that I love you, and to the fact that it is

unwise of me to love you--very unwise.
You know not how matters stand,

my darling.
You know not why I am BOUND to love you.
Otherwise you would

not say all that you do.
Yet I am persuaded that it is your head rather

than your heart that is speaking.
I am certain that your heart thinks

very differently.
What occurred that night between myself and those officers I scarcely

know, I scarcely remember.
You must bear in mind that for some time past

I have been in terrible distress--that for a whole month I have been, so

to speak, hanging by a single thread.
Indeed, my position has been most

pitiable.
Though I hid myself from you, my landlady was forever shouting

and railing at me.
This would not have mattered a jot--the horrible old

woman might have shouted as much as she pleased--had it not been that,

in the first place, there was the disgrace of it, and, in the second

place, she had somehow learned of our connection, and kept proclaiming

it to the household until I felt perfectly deafened, and had to stop my

ears.
The point, however, is that other people did not stop their ears,

but, on the contrary, pricked them.
Indeed, I am at a loss what to do.
Really this wretched rabble has driven me to extremities.
It all began

with my hearing a strange rumour from Thedora--namely, that an unworthy

suitor had been to visit you, and had insulted you with an improper

proposal.
That he had insulted you deeply I knew from my own feelings,

for I felt insulted in an equal degree.
Upon that, my angel, I went to

pieces, and, losing all self-control, plunged headlong.
Bursting into an

unspeakable frenzy, I was at once going to call upon this villain of a

seducer--though what to do next I knew not, seeing that I was fearful of

giving you offence.
Ah, what a night of sorrow it was, and what a time

of gloom, rain, and sleet!
Next, I was returning home, but found myself

unable to stand upon my feet.
Then Emelia Ilyitch happened to come

by.
He also is a tchinovnik--or rather, was a tchinovnik, since he was

turned out of the service some time ago.
What he was doing there at that

moment I do not know; I only know that I went with him....
Surely it

cannot give you pleasure to read of the misfortunes of your friend--of

his sorrows, and of the temptations which he experienced?...
On the

evening of the third day Emelia urged me to go and see the officer of

whom I have spoken, and whose address I had learned from our dvornik.
More strictly speaking, I had noticed him when, on a previous occasion,

he had come to play cards here, and I had followed him home.
Of course

I now see that I did wrong, but I felt beside myself when I heard

them telling him stories about me.
Exactly what happened next I cannot

remember.
I only remember that several other officers were present as

well as he.
Or it may be that I saw everything double--God alone knows.
Also, I cannot exactly remember what I said.
I only remember that in my

fury I said a great deal.
Then they turned me out of the room, and threw

me down the staircase--pushed me down it, that is to say.
How I got home

you know.
That is all.
Of course, later I blamed myself, and my pride

underwent a fall; but no extraneous person except yourself knows of the

affair, and in any case it does not matter.
Perhaps the affair is as you

imagine it to have been, Barbara?
One thing I know for certain, and that

is that last year one of our lodgers, Aksenti Osipovitch, took a similar

liberty with Peter Petrovitch, yet kept the fact secret, an absolute

secret.
He called him into his room (I happened to be looking through a

crack in the partition-wall), and had an explanation with him in the

way that a gentleman should--no one except myself being a witness of the

scene; whereas, in my own case, I had no explanation at all.
After the

scene was over, nothing further transpired between Aksenti Osipovitch

and Peter Petrovitch, for the reason that the latter was so desirous of

getting on in life that he held his tongue.
As a result, they bow and

shake hands whenever they meet....
I will not dispute the fact that I

have erred most grievously--that I should never dare to dispute, or that

I have fallen greatly in my own estimation; but, I think I was fated

from birth so to do--and one cannot escape fate, my beloved.
Here,

therefore, is a detailed explanation of my misfortunes and sorrows,

written for you to read whenever you may find it convenient.
I am far

from well, beloved, and have lost all my gaiety of disposition, but I

send you this letter as a token of my love, devotion, and respect, Oh

dear lady of my affections.--Your humble servant,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
July 29th.
MY DEAREST MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--I have read your two letters, and they

make my heart ache.
See here, dear friend of mine.
You pass over certain

things in silence, and write about a PORTION only of your misfortunes.
Can it be that the letters are the outcome of a mental disorder?...
Come

and see me, for God’s sake.
Come today, direct from the office, and dine

with us as you have done before.
As to how you are living now, or as to

what settlement you have made with your landlady, I know not, for you

write nothing concerning those two points, and seem purposely to have

left them unmentioned.
Au revoir, my friend.
Come to me today without

fail.
You would do better ALWAYS to dine here.
Thedora is an excellent

cook.
Goodbye--Your own,



BARBARA DOBROSELOVA.
August 1st.
MY DARLING BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--Thank God that He has sent you a chance

of repaying my good with good.
I believe in so doing, as well as in the

sweetness of your angelic heart.
Therefore, I will not reproach you.
Only I pray you, do not again blame me because in the decline of my life

I have played the spendthrift.
It was such a sin, was it not?--such a

thing to do?
And even if you would still have it that the sin was there,

remember, little friend, what it costs me to hear such words fall from

your lips.
Do not be vexed with me for saying this, for my heart is

fainting.
Poor people are subject to fancies--this is a provision of

nature.
I myself have had reason to know this.
The poor man is exacting.
He cannot see God’s world as it is, but eyes each passer-by askance, and

looks around him uneasily in order that he may listen to every word that

is being uttered.
May not people be talking of him?
How is it that he

is so unsightly?
What is he feeling at all?
What sort of figure is

he cutting on the one side or on the other?
It is matter of common

knowledge, my Barbara, that the poor man ranks lower than a rag, and

will never earn the respect of any one.
Yes, write about him as you

like--let scribblers say what they choose about him--he will ever remain

as he was.
And why is this?
It is because, from his very nature, the

poor man has to wear his feelings on his sleeve, so that nothing about

him is sacred, and as for his self-respect--!
Well, Emelia told me the

other day that once, when he had to collect subscriptions, official

sanction was demanded for every single coin, since people thought that

it would be no use paying their money to a poor man.
Nowadays charity

is strangely administered.
Perhaps it has always been so.
Either folk do

not know how to administer it, or they are adept in the art--one of the

two.
Perhaps you did not know this, so I beg to tell it you.
And how

comes it that the poor man knows, is so conscious of it all?
The answer

is--by experience.
He knows because any day he may see a gentleman enter

a restaurant and ask himself, “What shall I have to eat today?
I will

have such and such a dish,” while all the time the poor man will

have nothing to eat that day but gruel.
There are men, too--wretched

busybodies--who walk about merely to see if they can find some wretched

tchinovnik or broken-down official who has got toes projecting from his

boots or his hair uncut!
And when they have found such a one they make

a report of the circumstance, and their rubbish gets entered on the

file....
But what does it matter to you if my hair lacks the shears?
If

you will forgive me what may seem to you a piece of rudeness, I declare

that the poor man is ashamed of such things with the sensitiveness of a

young girl.
YOU, for instance, would not care (pray pardon my bluntness)

to unrobe yourself before the public eye; and in the same way, the poor

man does not like to be pried at or questioned concerning his family

relations, and so forth.
A man of honour and self-respect such as I

am finds it painful and grievous to have to consort with men who would

deprive him of both.
Today I sat before my colleagues like a bear’s cub or a plucked sparrow,

so that I fairly burned with shame.
Yes, it hurt me terribly, Barbara.
Naturally one blushes when one can see one’s naked toes projecting

through one’s boots, and one’s buttons hanging by a single thread!
As though on purpose, I seemed, on this occasion, to be peculiarly

dishevelled.
No wonder that my spirits fell.
When I was talking on

business matters to Stepan Karlovitch, he suddenly exclaimed, for no

apparent reason, “Ah, poor old Makar Alexievitch!” and then left the

rest unfinished.
But I knew what he had in his mind, and blushed so

hotly that even the bald patch on my head grew red.
Of course the whole

thing is nothing, but it worries me, and leads to anxious thoughts.
What

can these fellows know about me?
God send that they know nothing!
But

I confess that I suspect, I strongly suspect, one of my colleagues.
Let

them only betray me!
They would betray one’s private life for a groat,

for they hold nothing sacred.
I have an idea who is at the bottom of it all.
It is Rataziaev.
Probably

he knows someone in our department to whom he has recounted the

story with additions.
Or perhaps he has spread it abroad in his own

department, and thence, it has crept and crawled into ours.
Everyone

here knows it, down to the last detail, for I have seen them point at

you with their fingers through the window.
Oh yes, I have seen them do

it.
Yesterday, when I stepped across to dine with you, the whole crew

were hanging out of the window to watch me, and the landlady exclaimed

that the devil was in young people, and called you certain unbecoming

names.
But this is as nothing compared with Rataziaev’s foul intention

to place us in his books, and to describe us in a satire.
He himself has

declared that he is going to do so, and other people say the same.
In fact, I know not what to think, nor what to decide.
It is no use

concealing the fact that you and I have sinned against the Lord God....

You were going to send me a book of some sort, to divert my mind--were

you not, dearest?
What book, though, could now divert me?
Only such

books as have never existed on earth.
Novels are rubbish, and written

for fools and for the idle.
Believe me, dearest, I know it through long

experience.
Even should they vaunt Shakespeare to you, I tell you that

Shakespeare is rubbish, and proper only for lampoons--Your own,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
August 2nd.
MY DEAREST MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--Do not disquiet yourself.
God will grant

that all shall turn out well.
Thedora has obtained a quantity of work,

both for me and herself, and we are setting about it with a will.
Perhaps it will put us straight again.
Thedora suspects my late

misfortunes to be connected with Anna Thedorovna; but I do not care--I

feel extraordinarily cheerful today.
So you are thinking of borrowing

more money?
If so, may God preserve you, for you will assuredly be

ruined when the time comes for repayment!
You had far better come and

live with us here for a little while.
Yes, come and take up your abode

here, and pay no attention whatever to what your landlady says.
As for

the rest of your enemies and ill-wishers, I am certain that it is with

vain imaginings that you are vexing yourself....
In passing, let me tell

you that your style differs greatly from letter to letter.
Goodbye until

we meet again.
I await your coming with impatience--Your own,



B. D.









August 3rd.
MY ANGEL, BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--I hasten to inform you, Oh light of my

life, that my hopes are rising again.
But, little daughter of mine--do

you really mean it when you say that I am to indulge in no more

borrowings?
Why, I could not do without them.
Things would go badly with

us both if I did so.
You are ailing.
Consequently, I tell you roundly

that I MUST borrow, and that I must continue to do so.
Also, I may tell you that my seat in the office is now next to that of a

certain Emelia Ivanovitch.
He is not the Emelia whom you know, but a

man who, like myself, is a privy councillor, as well as represents, with

myself, the senior and oldest official in our department.
Likewise he is

a good, disinterested soul, and one that is not over-talkative, though

a true bear in appearance and demeanour.
Industrious, and possessed of

a handwriting purely English, his caligraphy is, it must be confessed,

even worse than my own.
Yes, he is a good soul.
At the same time, we

have never been intimate with one another.
We have done no more than

exchange greetings on meeting or parting, borrow one another’s penknife

if we needed one, and, in short, observe such bare civilities as

convention demands.
Well, today he said to me, “Makar Alexievitch,

what makes you look so thoughtful?” and inasmuch as I could see that

he wished me well, I told him all--or, rather, I did not tell him

EVERYTHING, for that I do to no man (I have not the heart to do it); I

told him just a few scattered details concerning my financial straits.
“Then you ought to borrow,” said he.
“You ought to obtain a loan of

Peter Petrovitch, who does a little in that way.
I myself once borrowed

some money of him, and he charged me fair and light interest.” Well,

Barbara, my heart leapt within me at these words.
I kept thinking and

thinking,--if only God would put it into the mind of Peter Petrovitch

to be my benefactor by advancing me a loan!
I calculated that with its

aid I might both repay my landlady and assist yourself and get rid of my

surroundings (where I can hardly sit down to table without the rascals

making jokes about me).
Sometimes his Excellency passes our desk in

the office.
He glances at me, and cannot but perceive how poorly I am

dressed.
Now, neatness and cleanliness are two of his strongest points.
Even though he says nothing, I feel ready to die with shame when he

approaches.
Well, hardening my heart, and putting my diffidence into my

ragged pocket, I approached Peter Petrovitch, and halted before him more

dead than alive.
Yet I was hopeful, and though, as it turned out, he

was busily engaged in talking to Thedosei Ivanovitch, I walked up to him

from behind, and plucked at his sleeve.
He looked away from me, but I

recited my speech about thirty roubles, et cetera, et cetera, of which,

at first, he failed to catch the meaning.
Even when I had explained

matters to him more fully, he only burst out laughing, and said nothing.
Again I addressed to him my request; whereupon, asking me what security

I could give, he again buried himself in his papers, and went on writing

without deigning me even a second glance.
Dismay seized me.
“Peter

Petrovitch,” I said, “I can offer you no security,” but to this I added

an explanation that some salary would, in time, be due to me, which

I would make over to him, and account the loan my first debt.
At

that moment someone called him away, and I had to wait a little.
On

returning, he began to mend his pen as though he had not even noticed

that I was there.
But I was for myself this time.
“Peter Petrovitch,” I

continued, “can you not do ANYTHING?” Still he maintained silence, and

seemed not to have heard me.
I waited and waited.
At length I determined

to make a final attempt, and plucked him by the sleeve.
He muttered

something, and, his pen mended, set about his writing.
There was nothing

for me to do but to depart.
He and the rest of them are worthy fellows,

dearest--that I do not doubt--but they are also proud, very proud.
What

have I to do with them?
Yet I thought I would write and tell you all

about it.
Meanwhile Emelia Ivanovitch had been encouraging me with nods

and smiles.
He is a good soul, and has promised to recommend me to a

friend of his who lives in Viborskaia Street and lends money.
Emelia

declares that this friend will certainly lend me a little; so tomorrow,

beloved, I am going to call upon the gentleman in question.... What do

you think about it?
It would be a pity not to obtain a loan.
My landlady

is on the point of turning me out of doors, and has refused to allow me

any more board.
Also, my boots are wearing through, and have lost every

button--and I do not possess another pair!
Could anyone in a government

office display greater shabbiness?
It is dreadful, my Barbara--it is

simply dreadful!
MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
August 4th.
MY BELOVED MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--For God’s sake borrow some money as

soon as you can.
I would not ask this help of you were it not for the

situation in which I am placed.
Thedora and myself cannot remain any

longer in our present lodgings, for we have been subjected to great

unpleasantness, and you cannot imagine my state of agitation and

dismay.
The reason is that this morning we received a visit from an

elderly--almost an old--man whose breast was studded with orders.
Greatly surprised, I asked him what he wanted (for at the moment Thedora

had gone out shopping); whereupon he began to question me as to my

mode of life and occupation, and then, without waiting for an answer,

informed me that he was uncle to the officer of whom you have spoken;

that he was very angry with his nephew for the way in which the latter

had behaved, especially with regard to his slandering of me right and

left; and that he, the uncle, was ready to protect me from the young

spendthrift’s insolence.
Also, he advised me to have nothing to say to

young fellows of that stamp, and added that he sympathised with me as

though he were my own father, and would gladly help me in any way he

could.
At this I blushed in some confusion, but did not greatly hasten

to thank him.
Next, he took me forcibly by the hand, and, tapping my

cheek, said that I was very good-looking, and that he greatly liked the

dimples in my face (God only knows what he meant!).
Finally he tried to

kiss me, on the plea that he was an old man, the brute!
At this moment

Thedora returned; whereupon, in some confusion, he repeated that he felt

a great respect for my modesty and virtue, and that he much wished to

become acquainted with me; after which he took Thedora aside, and tried,

on some pretext or another, to give her money (though of course she

declined it).
At last he took himself off--again reiterating his

assurances, and saying that he intended to return with some earrings as

a present; that he advised me to change my lodgings; and, that he could

recommend me a splendid flat which he had in his mind’s eye as likely to

cost me nothing.
Yes, he also declared that he greatly liked me for my

purity and good sense; that I must beware of dissolute young men; and

that he knew Anna Thedorovna, who had charged him to inform me that she

would shortly be visiting me in person.
Upon that, I understood all.
What I did next I scarcely know, for I had never before found myself in

such a position; but I believe that I broke all restraints, and made the

old man feel thoroughly ashamed of himself--Thedora helping me in the

task, and well-nigh turning him neck and crop out of the tenement.
Neither of us doubt that this is Anna Thedorovna’s work--for how

otherwise could the old man have got to know about us?
Now, therefore, Makar Alexievitch, I turn to you for help.
Do not, for

God’s sake, leave me in this plight.
Borrow all the money that you can

get, for I have not the wherewithal to leave these lodgings, yet cannot

possibly remain in them any longer.
At all events, this is Thedora’s

advice.
She and I need at least twenty-five roubles, which I will repay

you out of what I earn by my work, while Thedora shall get me additional

work from day to day, so that, if there be heavy interest to pay on the

loan, you shall not be troubled with the extra burden.
Nay, I will make

over to you all that I possess if only you will continue to help me.
Truly, I grieve to have to trouble you when you yourself are so hardly

situated, but my hopes rest upon you, and upon you alone.
Goodbye, Makar

Alexievitch.
Think of me, and may God speed you on your errand!
B.D.
August 4th.
MY BELOVED BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--These unlooked-for blows have shaken me

terribly, and these strange calamities have quite broken my spirit.
Not content with trying to bring you to a bed of sickness, these

lickspittles and pestilent old men are trying to bring me to the same.
And I assure you that they are succeeding--I assure you that they are.
Yet I would rather die than not help you.
If I cannot help you I SHALL

die; but, to enable me to help you, you must flee like a bird out of the

nest where these owls, these birds of prey, are seeking to peck you to

death.
How distressed I feel, my dearest!
Yet how cruel you yourself

are!
Although you are enduring pain and insult, although you, little

nestling, are in agony of spirit, you actually tell me that it grieves

you to disturb me, and that you will work off your debt to me with the

labour of your own hands!
In other words, you, with your weak health,

are proposing to kill yourself in order to relieve me to term of my

financial embarrassments!
Stop a moment, and think what you are saying.
WHY should you sew, and work, and torture your poor head with anxiety,

and spoil your beautiful eyes, and ruin your health?
Why, indeed?
Ah,

little Barbara, little Barbara!
Do you not see that I shall never be any

good to you, never any good to you?
At all events, I myself see it.
Yet

I WILL help you in your distress.
I WILL overcome every difficulty, I

WILL get extra work to do, I WILL copy out manuscripts for authors,

I WILL go to the latter and force them to employ me, I WILL so apply

myself to the work that they shall see that I am a good copyist (and

good copyists, I know, are always in demand).
Thus there will be no need

for you to exhaust your strength, nor will I allow you to do so--I will

not have you carry out your disastrous intention...
Yes, little angel,

I will certainly borrow some money.
I would rather die than not do

so.
Merely tell me, my own darling, that I am not to shrink from heavy

interest, and I will not shrink from it, I will not shrink from it--nay,

I will shrink from nothing.
I will ask for forty roubles, to begin with.
That will not be much, will it, little Barbara?
Yet will any one trust

me even with that sum at the first asking?
Do you think that I am

capable of inspiring confidence at the first glance?
Would the mere

sight of my face lead any one to form of me a favourable opinion?
Have I

ever been able, remember you, to appear to anyone in a favourable light?
What think you?
Personally, I see difficulties in the way, and feel sick

at heart at the mere prospect.
However, of those forty roubles I mean

to set aside twenty-five for yourself, two for my landlady, and the

remainder for my own spending.
Of course, I ought to give more than

two to my landlady, but you must remember my necessities, and see for

yourself that that is the most that can be assigned to her.
We need say

no more about it.
For one rouble I shall buy me a new pair of shoes, for

I scarcely know whether my old ones will take me to the office tomorrow

morning.
Also, a new neck-scarf is indispensable, seeing that the old

one has now passed its first year; but, since you have promised to make

of your old apron not only a scarf, but also a shirt-front, I need think

no more of the article in question.
So much for shoes and scarves.
Next,

for buttons.
You yourself will agree that I cannot do without buttons;

nor is there on my garments a single hem unfrayed.
I tremble when I

think that some day his Excellency may perceive my untidiness, and

say--well, what will he NOT say?
Yet I shall never hear what he says,

for I shall have expired where I sit--expired of mere shame at the

thought of having been thus exposed.
Ah, dearest!...
Well, my various

necessities will have left me three roubles to go on with.
Part of

this sum I shall expend upon a half-pound of tobacco--for I cannot live

without tobacco, and it is nine days since I last put a pipe into my

mouth.
To tell the truth, I shall buy the tobacco without acquainting

you with the fact, although I ought not so to do.
The pity of it all is

that, while you are depriving yourself of everything, I keep solacing

myself with various amenities--which is why I am telling you this, that

the pangs of conscience may not torment me.
Frankly, I confess that I

am in desperate straits--in such straits as I have never yet known.
My

landlady flouts me, and I enjoy the respect of no one; my arrears and

debts are terrible; and in the office, though never have I found the

place exactly a paradise, no one has a single word to say to me.
Yet I

hide, I carefully hide, this from every one.
I would hide my person in

the same way, were it not that daily I have to attend the office where

I have to be constantly on my guard against my fellows.
Nevertheless,

merely to be able to CONFESS this to you renews my spiritual strength.
We must not think of these things, Barbara, lest the thought of them

break our courage.
I write them down merely to warn you NOT to think of

them, nor to torture yourself with bitter imaginings.
Yet, my God, what

is to become of us?
Stay where you are until I can come to you; after

which I shall not return hither, but simply disappear.
Now I have

finished my letter, and must go and shave myself, inasmuch as, when that

is done, one always feels more decent, as well as consorts more easily

with decency.
God speed me!
One prayer to Him, and I must be off.
M. DIEVUSHKIN.
August 5th.
DEAREST MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--You must not despair.
Away with melancholy!
I am sending you thirty kopecks in silver, and regret that I cannot send

you more.
Buy yourself what you most need until tomorrow.
I myself have

almost nothing left, and what I am going to do I know not.
Is it not

dreadful, Makar Alexievitch?
Yet do not be downcast--it is no good being

that.
Thedora declares that it would not be a bad thing if we were to

remain in this tenement, since if we left it suspicions would arise, and

our enemies might take it into their heads to look for us.
On the other

hand, I do not think it would be well for us to remain here.
If I were

feeling less sad I would tell you my reason.
What a strange man you are, Makar Alexievitch!
You take things so much

to heart that you never know what it is to be happy.
I read your letters

attentively, and can see from them that, though you worry and disturb

yourself about me, you never give a thought to yourself.
Yes, every

letter tells me that you have a kind heart; but I tell YOU that that

heart is overly kind.
So I will give you a little friendly advice, Makar

Alexievitch.
I am full of gratitude towards you--I am indeed full for

all that you have done for me, I am most sensible of your goodness;

but, to think that I should be forced to see that, in spite of your own

troubles (of which I have been the involuntary cause), you live for me

alone--you live but for MY joys and MY sorrows and MY affection!
If you

take the affairs of another person so to heart, and suffer with her to

such an extent, I do not wonder that you yourself are unhappy.
Today,

when you came to see me after office-work was done, I felt afraid even

to raise my eyes to yours, for you looked so pale and desperate, and

your face had so fallen in.
Yes, you were dreading to have to tell me

of your failure to borrow money--you were dreading to have to grieve and

alarm me; but, when you saw that I came very near to smiling, the load

was, I know, lifted from your heart.
So do not be despondent, do not

give way, but allow more rein to your better sense.
I beg and implore

this of you, for it will not be long before you see things take a turn

for the better.
You will but spoil your life if you constantly lament

another person’s sorrow.
Goodbye, dear friend.
I beseech you not to be

over-anxious about me.
B. D.









August 5th.
MY DARLING LITTLE BARBARA,--This is well, this is well, my angel!
So you

are of opinion that the fact that I have failed to obtain any money does

not matter?
Then I too am reassured, I too am happy on your account.
Also, I am delighted to think that you are not going to desert your old

friend, but intend to remain in your present lodgings.
Indeed, my heart

was overcharged with joy when I read in your letter those kindly words

about myself, as well as a not wholly unmerited recognition of my

sentiments.
I say this not out of pride, but because now I know how much

you love me to be thus solicitous for my feelings.
How good to

think that I may speak to you of them!
You bid me, darling, not be

faint-hearted.
Indeed, there is no need for me to be so.
Think, for

instance, of the pair of shoes which I shall be wearing to the office

tomorrow!
The fact is that over-brooding proves the undoing of a

man--his complete undoing.
What has saved me is the fact that it is not

for myself that I am grieving, that I am suffering, but for YOU.
Nor

would it matter to me in the least that I should have to walk through

the bitter cold without an overcoat or boots--I could bear it, I could

well endure it, for I am a simple man in my requirements; but the point

is--what would people say, what would every envious and hostile tongue

exclaim, when I was seen without an overcoat?
It is for OTHER folk that

one wears an overcoat and boots.
In any case, therefore, I should have

needed boots to maintain my name and reputation; to both of which my

ragged footgear would otherwise have spelled ruin.
Yes, it is so,

my beloved, and you may believe an old man who has had many years of

experience, and knows both the world and mankind, rather than a set of

scribblers and daubers.
But I have not yet told you in detail how things have gone with me

today.
During the morning I suffered as much agony of spirit as might

have been experienced in a year.
‘Twas like this: First of all, I went

out to call upon the gentleman of whom I have spoken.
I started very

early, before going to the office.
Rain and sleet were falling, and

I hugged myself in my greatcoat as I walked along.
“Lord,” thought I,

“pardon my offences, and send me fulfilment of all my desires;” and as

I passed a church I crossed myself, repented of my sins, and reminded

myself that I was unworthy to hold communication with the Lord God.
Then

I retired into myself, and tried to look at nothing; and so, walking

without noticing the streets, I proceeded on my way.
Everything had an

empty air, and everyone whom I met looked careworn and preoccupied, and

no wonder, for who would choose to walk abroad at such an early hour,

and in such weather?
Next a band of ragged workmen met me, and jostled

me boorishly as they passed; upon which nervousness overtook me, and

I felt uneasy, and tried hard not to think of the money that was

my errand.
Near the Voskresenski Bridge my feet began to ache with

weariness, until I could hardly pull myself along; until presently I met

with Ermolaev, a writer in our office, who, stepping aside, halted, and

followed me with his eyes, as though to beg of me a glass of vodka.
“Ah,

friend,” thought I, “go YOU to your vodka, but what have I to do with

such stuff?” Then, sadly weary, I halted for a moment’s rest, and

thereafter dragged myself further on my way.
Purposely I kept looking

about me for something upon which to fasten my thoughts, with which to

distract, to encourage myself; but there was nothing.
Not a single idea

could I connect with any given object, while, in addition, my appearance

was so draggled that I felt utterly ashamed of it.
At length I perceived

from afar a gabled house that was built of yellow wood.
This, I thought,

must be the residence of the Monsieur Markov whom Emelia Ivanovitch had

mentioned to me as ready to lend money on interest.
Half unconscious

of what I was doing, I asked a watchman if he could tell me to whom the

house belonged; whereupon grudgingly, and as though he were vexed at

something, the fellow muttered that it belonged to one Markov.
Are ALL

watchmen so unfeeling?
Why did this one reply as he did?
In any case I

felt disagreeably impressed, for like always answers to like, and, no

matter what position one is in, things invariably appear to correspond

to it.
Three times did I pass the house and walk the length of the

street; until the further I walked, the worse became my state of mind.
“No, never, never will he lend me anything!” I thought to myself, “He

does not know me, and my affairs will seem to him ridiculous, and I

shall cut a sorry figure.
However, let fate decide for me.
Only, let

Heaven send that I do not afterwards repent me, and eat out my heart

with remorse!” Softly I opened the wicket-gate.
Horrors!
A great ragged

brute of a watch-dog came flying out at me, and foaming at the mouth,

and nearly jumping out his skin!
Curious is it to note what little,

trivial incidents will nearly make a man crazy, and strike terror to his

heart, and annihilate the firm purpose with which he has armed himself.
At all events, I approached the house more dead than alive, and walked

straight into another catastrophe.
That is to say, not noticing the

slipperiness of the threshold, I stumbled against an old woman who

was filling milk-jugs from a pail, and sent the milk flying in every

direction!
The foolish old dame gave a start and a cry, and then

demanded of me whither I had been coming, and what it was I wanted;

after which she rated me soundly for my awkwardness.
Always have I found

something of the kind befall me when engaged on errands of this nature.
It seems to be my destiny invariably to run into something.
Upon that,

the noise and the commotion brought out the mistress of the house--an

old beldame of mean appearance.
I addressed myself directly to her:

“Does Monsieur Markov live here?” was my inquiry.
“No,” she replied, and

then stood looking at me civilly enough.
“But what want you with him?”

 she continued; upon which I told her about Emelia Ivanovitch and

the rest of the business.
As soon as I had finished, she called her

daughter--a barefooted girl in her teens--and told her to summon her

father from upstairs.
Meanwhile, I was shown into a room which contained

several portraits of generals on the walls and was furnished with a

sofa, a large table, and a few pots of mignonette and balsam.
“Shall I,

or shall I not (come weal, come woe) take myself off?” was my thought as

I waited there.
Ah, how I longed to run away!
“Yes,” I continued, “I had

better come again tomorrow, for the weather may then be better, and I

shall not have upset the milk, and these generals will not be looking at

me so fiercely.” In fact, I had actually begun to move towards the door

when Monsieur Markov entered--a grey-headed man with thievish eyes, and

clad in a dirty dressing-gown fastened with a belt.
Greetings over, I

stumbled out something about Emelia Ivanovitch and forty roubles, and

then came to a dead halt, for his eyes told me that my errand had been

futile.
“No.” said he, “I have no money.
Moreover, what security

could you offer?” I admitted that I could offer none, but again added

something about Emelia, as well as about my pressing needs.
Markov heard

me out, and then repeated that he had no money.
“Ah,” thought I, “I

might have known this--I might have foreseen it!” And, to tell the

truth, Barbara, I could have wished that the earth had opened under my

feet, so chilled did I feel as he said what he did, so numbed did my

legs grow as shivers began to run down my back.
Thus I remained gazing

at him while he returned my gaze with a look which said, “Well now,

my friend?
Why do you not go since you have no further business to do

here?” Somehow I felt conscience-stricken.
“How is it that you are in

such need of money?” was what he appeared to be asking; whereupon, I

opened my mouth (anything rather than stand there to no purpose at all!)
but found that he was not even listening.
“I have no money,” again he

said, “or I would lend you some with pleasure.” Several times I repeated

that I myself possessed a little, and that I would repay any loan

from him punctually, most punctually, and that he might charge me what

interest he liked, since I would meet it without fail.
Yes, at that

moment I remembered our misfortunes, our necessities, and I remembered

your half-rouble.
“No,” said he, “I can lend you nothing without

security,” and clinched his assurance with an oath, the robber!
How I contrived to leave the house and, passing through Viborskaia

Street, to reach the Voskresenski Bridge I do not know.
I only remember

that I felt terribly weary, cold, and starved, and that it was ten

o’clock before I reached the office.
Arriving, I tried to clean myself

up a little, but Sniegirev, the porter, said that it was impossible for

me to do so, and that I should only spoil the brush, which belonged to

the Government.
Thus, my darling, do such fellows rate me lower than

the mat on which they wipe their boots!
What is it that will most

surely break me?
It is not the want of money, but the LITTLE worries

of life--these whisperings and nods and jeers.
Any day his Excellency

himself may round upon me.
Ah, dearest, my golden days are gone.
Today I

have spent in reading your letters through; and the reading of them has

made me sad.
Goodbye, my own, and may the Lord watch over you!
M. DIEVUSHKIN.
P.S.--To conceal my sorrow I would have written this letter half

jestingly; but, the faculty of jesting has not been given me.
My one

desire, however, is to afford you pleasure.
Soon I will come and see

you, dearest.
Without fail I will come and see you.
August 11th.
O Barbara Alexievna, I am undone--we are both of us undone!
Both of

us are lost beyond recall!
Everything is ruined--my reputation, my

self-respect, all that I have in the world!
And you as much as I.
Never

shall we retrieve what we have lost.
I--I have brought you to this pass,

for I have become an outcast, my darling.
Everywhere I am laughed at

and despised.
Even my landlady has taken to abusing me.
Today she

overwhelmed me with shrill reproaches, and abased me to the level of a

hearth-brush.
And last night, when I was in Rataziaev’s rooms, one of

his friends began to read a scribbled note which I had written to

you, and then inadvertently pulled out of my pocket.
Oh beloved, what

laughter there arose at the recital!
How those scoundrels mocked and

derided you and myself!
I walked up to them and accused Rataziaev of

breaking faith.
I said that he had played the traitor.
But he only

replied that I had been the betrayer in the case, by indulging in

various amours.
“You have kept them very dark though, Mr. Lovelace!”

 said he--and now I am known everywhere by this name of “Lovelace.” They

know EVERYTHING about us, my darling, EVERYTHING--both about you and

your affairs and about myself; and when today I was for sending Phaldoni

to the bakeshop for something or other, he refused to go, saying that

it was not his business.
“But you MUST go,” said I.
“I will not,” he

replied.
“You have not paid my mistress what you owe her, so I am not

bound to run your errands.” At such an insult from a raw peasant I lost

my temper, and called him a fool; to which he retorted in a similar

vein.
Upon this I thought that he must be drunk, and told him so;

whereupon he replied: “WHAT say you that I am?
Suppose you yourself go

and sober up, for I know that the other day you went to visit a woman,

and that you got drunk with her on two grivenniks.” To such a pass have

things come!
I feel ashamed to be seen alive.
I am, as it were, a man

proclaimed; I am in a worse plight even than a tramp who has lost his

passport.
How misfortunes are heaping themselves upon me!
I am lost--I

am lost for ever!
M. D.









August 13th.
MY BELOVED MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--It is true that misfortune is following

upon misfortune.
I myself scarcely know what to do.
Yet, no matter how

you may be fairing, you must not look for help from me, for only today I

burned my left hand with the iron!
At one and the same moment I dropped

the iron, made a mistake in my work, and burned myself!
So now I can no

longer work.
Also, these three days past, Thedora has been ailing.
My anxiety is becoming positively torturous.
Nevertheless, I send you

thirty kopecks--almost the last coins that I have left to me, much as I

should have liked to have helped you more when you are so much in need.
I feel vexed to the point of weeping.
Goodbye, dear friend of mine.
You

will bring me much comfort if only you will come and see me today.
B. D.









August 14th.
What is the matter with you, Makar Alexievitch?
Surely you cannot

fear the Lord God as you ought to do?
You are not only driving me to

distraction but also ruining yourself with this eternal solicitude for

your reputation.
You are a man of honour, nobility of character, and

self-respect, as everyone knows; yet, at any moment, you are ready to

die with shame!
Surely you should have more consideration for your grey

hairs.
No, the fear of God has departed from you.
Thedora has told you

that it is out of my power to render you anymore help.
See, therefore,

to what a pass you have brought me!
Probably you think it is nothing to

me that you should behave so badly; probably you do not realise what you

have made me suffer.
I dare not set foot on the staircase here, for if

I do so I am stared at, and pointed at, and spoken about in the most

horrible manner.
Yes, it is even said of me that I am “united to a

drunkard.” What a thing to hear!
And whenever you are brought home drunk

folk say, “They are carrying in that tchinovnik.” THAT is not the proper

way to make me help you.
I swear that I MUST leave this place, and go

and get work as a cook or a laundress.
It is impossible for me to stay

here.
Long ago I wrote and asked you to come and see me, yet you have

not come.
Truly my tears and prayers must mean NOTHING to you, Makar

Alexievitch!
Whence, too, did you get the money for your debauchery?
For

the love of God be more careful of yourself, or you will be ruined.
How

shameful, how abominable of you!
So the landlady would not admit you

last night, and you spent the night on the doorstep?
Oh, I know all

about it.
Yet if only you could have seen my agony when I heard the

news!...
Come and see me, Makar Alexievitch, and we will once more be

happy together.
Yes, we will read together, and talk of old times, and

Thedora shall tell you of her pilgrimages in former days.
For God’s sake

beloved, do not ruin both yourself and me.
I live for you alone; it

is for your sake alone that I am still here.
Be your better self once

more--the self which still can remain firm in the face of misfortune.
Poverty is no crime; always remember that.
After all, why should we

despair?
Our present difficulties will pass away, and God will right

us.
Only be brave.
I send you two grivenniks for the purchase of some

tobacco or anything else that you need; but, for the love of heaven, do

not spend the money foolishly.
Come you and see me soon; come without

fail.
Perhaps you may be ashamed to meet me, as you were before, but you

NEED not feel like that--such shame would be misplaced.
Only do bring

with you sincere repentance and trust in God, who orders all things for

the best.
B. D.









August 19th.
MY DEAREST BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,-Yes, I AM ashamed to meet you, my

darling--I AM ashamed.
At the same time, what is there in all this?
Why

should we not be cheerful again?
Why should I mind the soles of my feet

coming through my boots?
The sole of one’s foot is a mere bagatelle--it

will never be anything but just a base, dirty sole.
And shoes do not

matter, either.
The Greek sages used to walk about without them, so why

should we coddle ourselves with such things?
Yet why, also, should I

be insulted and despised because of them?
Tell Thedora that she is a

rubbishy, tiresome, gabbling old woman, as well as an inexpressibly

foolish one.
As for my grey hairs, you are quite wrong about them,

inasmuch as I am not such an old man as you think.
Emelia sends you

his greeting.
You write that you are in great distress, and have been

weeping.
Well, I too am in great distress, and have been weeping.
Nay,

nay.
I wish you the best of health and happiness, even as I am well and

happy myself, so long as I may remain, my darling,--Your friend,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
August 21st.
MY DEAR AND KIND BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--I feel that I am guilty, I feel

that I have sinned against you.
Yet also I feel, from what you say, that

it is no use for me so to feel.
Even before I had sinned I felt as I do

now; but I gave way to despair, and the more so as recognised my fault.
Darling, I am not cruel or hardhearted.
To rend your little soul would

be the act of a blood-thirsty tiger, whereas I have the heart of a

sheep.
You yourself know that I am not addicted to bloodthirstiness,

and therefore that I cannot really be guilty of the fault in question,

seeing that neither my mind nor my heart have participated in it.
Nor can I understand wherein the guilt lies.
To me it is all a mystery.
When you sent me those thirty kopecks, and thereafter those two

grivenniks, my heart sank within me as I looked at the poor little

money.
To think that though you had burned your hand, and would soon be

hungry, you could write to me that I was to buy tobacco!
What was I to

do?
Remorselessly to rob you, an orphan, as any brigand might do?
I

felt greatly depressed, dearest.
That is to say, persuaded that I should

never do any good with my life, and that I was inferior even to the

sole of my own boot, I took it into my head that it was absurd for me to

aspire at all--rather, that I ought to account myself a disgrace and an

abomination.
Once a man has lost his self-respect, and has decided to

abjure his better qualities and human dignity, he falls headlong, and

cannot choose but do so.
It is decreed of fate, and therefore I am not

guilty in this respect.
That evening I went out merely to get a breath

of fresh air, but one thing followed another--the weather was cold, all

nature was looking mournful, and I had fallen in with Emelia.
This man

had spent everything that he possessed, and, at the time I met him, had

not for two days tasted a crust of bread.
He had tried to raise money by

pawning, but what articles he had for the purpose had been refused by

the pawnbrokers.
It was more from sympathy for a fellow-man than from

any liking for the individual that I yielded.
That is how the fault

arose, dearest.
He spoke of you, and I mingled my tears with his.
Yes,

he is a man of kind, kind heart--a man of deep feeling.
I often feel as

he did, dearest, and, in addition, I know how beholden to you I am.
As

soon as ever I got to know you I began both to realise myself and to

love you; for until you came into my life I had been a lonely man--I had

been, as it were, asleep rather than alive.
In former days my rascally

colleagues used to tell me that I was unfit even to be seen; in fact,

they so disliked me that at length I began to dislike myself, for, being

frequently told that I was stupid, I began to believe that I really was

so.
But the instant that YOU came into my life, you lightened the dark

places in it, you lightened both my heart and my soul.
Gradually, I

gained rest of spirit, until I had come to see that I was no worse than

other men, and that, though I had neither style nor brilliancy nor

polish, I was still a MAN as regards my thoughts and feelings.
But now,

alas!
pursued and scorned of fate, I have again allowed myself to abjure

my own dignity.
Oppressed of misfortune, I have lost my courage.
Here is

my confession to you, dearest.
With tears I beseech you not to inquire

further into the matter, for my heart is breaking, and life has grown

indeed hard and bitter for me--Beloved, I offer you my respect, and

remain ever your faithful friend,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
September 3rd.
The reason why I did not finish my last letter, Makar Alexievitch, was

that I found it so difficult to write.
There are moments when I am glad

to be alone--to grieve and repine without any one to share my sorrow:

and those moments are beginning to come upon me with ever-increasing

frequency.
Always in my reminiscences I find something which is

inexplicable, yet strongly attractive--so much so that for hours together

I remain insensible to my surroundings, oblivious of reality.
Indeed,

in my present life there is not a single impression that I

encounter--pleasant or the reverse--which does not recall to my mind

something of a similar nature in the past.
More particularly is this the

case with regard to my childhood, my golden childhood.
Yet such moments

always leave me depressed.
They render me weak, and exhaust my powers of

fancy; with the result that my health, already not good, grows steadily

worse.
However, this morning it is a fine, fresh, cloudless day, such as we

seldom get in autumn.
The air has revived me and I greet it with joy.
Yet to think that already the fall of the year has come!
How I used

to love the country in autumn!
Then but a child, I was yet a sensitive

being who loved autumn evenings better than autumn mornings.
I remember

how beside our house, at the foot of a hill, there lay a large pond, and

how the pond--I can see it even now!--shone with a broad, level surface

that was as clear as crystal.
On still evenings this pond would be at

rest, and not a rustle would disturb the trees which grew on its banks

and overhung the motionless expanse of water.
How fresh it used to seem,

yet how cold!
The dew would be falling upon the turf, lights would be

beginning to shine forth from the huts on the pond’s margin, and the

cattle would be wending their way home.
Then quietly I would slip out

of the house to look at my beloved pond, and forget myself in

contemplation.
Here and there a fisherman’s bundle of brushwood would be

burning at the water’s edge, and sending its light far and wide over

the surface.
Above, the sky would be of a cold blue colour, save for a

fringe of flame-coloured streaks on the horizon that kept turning ever

paler and paler; and when the moon had come out there would be wafted

through the limpid air the sounds of a frightened bird fluttering, of a

bulrush rubbing against its fellows in the gentle breeze, and of a fish

rising with a splash.
Over the dark water there would gather a thin,

transparent mist; and though, in the distance, night would be looming,

and seemingly enveloping the entire horizon, everything closer at hand

would be standing out as though shaped with a chisel--banks, boats,

little islands, and all.
Beside the margin a derelict barrel would be

turning over and over in the water; a switch of laburnum, with yellowing

leaves, would go meandering through the reeds; and a belated gull

would flutter up, dive again into the cold depths, rise once more, and

disappear into the mist.
How I would watch and listen to these things!
How strangely good they all would seem!
But I was a mere infant in those

days--a mere child.
Yes, truly I loved autumn-tide--the late autumn when the crops are

garnered, and field work is ended, and the evening gatherings in the

huts have begun, and everyone is awaiting winter.
Then does everything

become more mysterious, the sky frowns with clouds, yellow leaves strew

the paths at the edge of the naked forest, and the forest itself turns

black and blue--more especially at eventide when damp fog is spreading

and the trees glimmer in the depths like giants, like formless, weird

phantoms.
Perhaps one may be out late, and had got separated from one’s

companions.
Oh horrors!
Suddenly one starts and trembles as one seems to

see a strange-looking being peering from out of the darkness of a hollow

tree, while all the while the wind is moaning and rattling and howling

through the forest--moaning with a hungry sound as it strips the leaves

from the bare boughs, and whirls them into the air.
High over the

tree-tops, in a widespread, trailing, noisy crew, there fly, with

resounding cries, flocks of birds which seem to darken and overlay the

very heavens.
Then a strange feeling comes over one, until one seems to

hear the voice of some one whispering: “Run, run, little child!
Do not

be out late, for this place will soon have become dreadful!
Run, little

child!
Run!” And at the words terror will possess one’s soul, and one

will rush and rush until one’s breath is spent--until, panting, one has

reached home.
At home, however, all will look bright and bustling as we

children are set to shell peas or poppies, and the damp twigs crackle in

the stove, and our mother comes to look fondly at our work, and our old

nurse, Iliana, tells us stories of bygone days, or terrible legends

concerning wizards and dead men.
At the recital we little ones will

press closer to one another, yet smile as we do so; when suddenly,

everyone becomes silent.
Surely somebody has knocked at the door?...
But

nay, nay; it is only the sound of Frolovna’s spinning-wheel.
What shouts

of laughter arise!
Later one will be unable to sleep for fear of the

strange dreams which come to visit one; or, if one falls asleep, one

will soon wake again, and, afraid to stir, lie quaking under the

coverlet until dawn.
And in the morning, one will arise as fresh as a

lark and look at the window, and see the fields overlaid with hoarfrost,

and fine icicles hanging from the naked branches, and the pond covered

over with ice as thin as paper, and a white steam rising from the

surface, and birds flying overhead with cheerful cries.
Next, as the sun

rises, he throws his glittering beams everywhere, and melts the thin,

glassy ice until the whole scene has come to look bright and clear and

exhilarating; and as the fire begins to crackle again in the stove, we

sit down to the tea-urn, while, chilled with the night cold, our black

dog, Polkan, will look in at us through the window, and wag his tail

with a cheerful air.
Presently, a peasant will pass the window in his

cart bound for the forest to cut firewood, and the whole party will feel

merry and contented together.
Abundant grain lies stored in the byres,

and great stacks of wheat are glowing comfortably in the morning

sunlight.
Everyone is quiet and happy, for God has blessed us with a

bounteous harvest, and we know that there will be abundance of food for

the wintertide.
Yes, the peasant may rest assured that his family will

not want for aught.
Song and dance will arise at night from the village

girls, and on festival days everyone will repair to God’s house to thank

Him with grateful tears for what He has done.... Ah, a golden time was

my time of childhood!...
Carried away by these memories, I could weep like a child.
Everything,

everything comes back so clearly to my recollection!
The past stands out

so vividly before me!
Yet in the present everything looks dim and dark!
How will it all end?--how?
Do you know, I have a feeling, a sort of

sure premonition, that I am going to die this coming autumn; for I feel

terribly, oh so terribly ill!
Often do I think of death, yet feel that

I should not like to die here and be laid to rest in the soil of St.

Petersburg.
Once more I have had to take to my bed, as I did last

spring, for I have never really recovered.
Indeed I feel so depressed!
Thedora has gone out for the day, and I am alone.
For a long while past

I have been afraid to be left by myself, for I keep fancying that there

is someone else in the room, and that that someone is speaking to me.
Especially do I fancy this when I have gone off into a reverie, and then

suddenly awoken from it, and am feeling bewildered.
That is why I have

made this letter such a long one; for, when I am writing, the mood

passes away.
Goodbye.
I have neither time nor paper left for more, and

must close.
Of the money which I saved to buy a new dress and hat, there

remains but a single rouble; but, I am glad that you have been able to

pay your landlady two roubles, for they will keep her tongue quiet for a

time.
And you must repair your wardrobe.
Goodbye once more.
I am so tired!
Nor can I think why I am growing so

weak--why it is that even the smallest task now wearies me?
Even if work

should come my way, how am I to do it?
That is what worries me above all

things.
B. D.









September 5th.
MY BELOVED BARBARA,--Today I have undergone a variety of experiences.
In

the first place, my head has been aching, and towards evening I went out

to get a breath of fresh air along the Fontanka Canal.
The weather was

dull and damp, and even by six o’clock, darkness had begun to set in.
True, rain was not actually falling, but only a mist like rain, while

the sky was streaked with masses of trailing cloud.
Crowds of people

were hurrying along Naberezhnaia Street, with faces that looked strange

and dejected.
There were drunken peasants; snub-nosed old harridans in

slippers; bareheaded artisans; cab drivers; every species of beggar;

boys; a locksmith’s apprentice in a striped smock, with lean, emaciated

features which seemed to have been washed in rancid oil; an ex-soldier

who was offering penknives and copper rings for sale; and so on, and

so on.
It was the hour when one would expect to meet no other folk than

these.
And what a quantity of boats there were on the canal.
It made

one wonder how they could all find room there.
On every bridge were

old women selling damp gingerbread or withered apples, and every woman

looked as damp and dirty as her wares.
In short, the Fontanka is a

saddening spot for a walk, for there is wet granite under one’s feet,

and tall, dingy buildings on either side of one, and wet mist below and

wet mist above.
Yes, all was dark and gloomy there this evening.
By the time I had returned to Gorokhovaia Street darkness had fallen

and the lamps had been lit.
However, I did not linger long in that

particular spot, for Gorokhovaia Street is too noisy a place.
But

what sumptuous shops and stores it contains!
Everything sparkles and

glitters, and the windows are full of nothing but bright colours and

materials and hats of different shapes.
One might think that they were

decked merely for display; but no,--people buy these things, and give

them to their wives!
Yes, it IS a sumptuous place.
Hordes of German

hucksters are there, as well as quite respectable traders.
And the

quantities of carriages which pass along the street!
One marvels that

the pavement can support so many splendid vehicles, with windows like

crystal, linings made of silk and velvet, and lacqueys dressed in

epaulets and wearing swords!
Into some of them I glanced, and saw that

they contained ladies of various ages.
Perhaps they were princesses and

countesses!
Probably at that hour such folk would be hastening to balls

and other gatherings.
In fact, it was interesting to be able to look so

closely at a princess or a great lady.
They were all very fine.
At

all events, I had never before seen such persons as I beheld in those

carriages....



Then I thought of you.
Ah, my own, my darling, it is often that I think

of you and feel my heart sink.
How is it that YOU are so unfortunate,

Barbara?
How is it that YOU are so much worse off than other people?
In

my eyes you are kind-hearted, beautiful, and clever--why, then, has

such an evil fate fallen to your lot?
How comes it that you are left

desolate--you, so good a human being!
While to others happiness comes

without an invitation at all?
Yes, I know--I know it well--that I ought

not to say it, for to do so savours of free-thought; but why should that

raven, Fate, croak out upon the fortunes of one person while she is yet

in her mother’s womb, while another person it permits to go forth in

happiness from the home which has reared her?
To even an idiot of

an Ivanushka such happiness is sometimes granted.
“You, you fool

Ivanushka,” says Fate, “shall succeed to your grandfather’s money-bags,

and eat, drink, and be merry; whereas YOU (such and such another one)

shall do no more than lick the dish, since that is all that you are

good for.” Yes, I know that it is wrong to hold such opinions, but

involuntarily the sin of so doing grows upon one’s soul.
Nevertheless,

it is you, my darling, who ought to be riding in one of those carriages.
Generals would have come seeking your favour, and, instead of being

clad in a humble cotton dress, you would have been walking in silken

and golden attire.
Then you would not have been thin and wan as now,

but fresh and plump and rosy-cheeked as a figure on a sugar-cake.
Then

should I too have been happy--happy if only I could look at your lighted

windows from the street, and watch your shadow--happy if only I could

think that you were well and happy, my sweet little bird!
Yet how are

things in reality?
Not only have evil folk brought you to ruin, but

there comes also an old rascal of a libertine to insult you!
Just

because he struts about in a frockcoat, and can ogle you through a

gold-mounted lorgnette, the brute thinks that everything will fall into

his hands--that you are bound to listen to his insulting condescension!
Out upon him!
But why is this?
It is because you are an orphan, it is

because you are unprotected, it is because you have no powerful friend

to afford you the decent support which is your due.
WHAT do such facts

matter to a man or to men to whom the insulting of an orphan is an

offence allowed?
Such fellows are not men at all, but mere vermin, no

matter what they think themselves to be.
Of that I am certain.
Why,

an organ-grinder whom I met in Gorokhovaia Street would inspire more

respect than they do, for at least he walks about all day, and suffers

hunger--at least he looks for a stray, superfluous groat to earn him

subsistence, and is, therefore, a true gentleman, in that he supports

himself.
To beg alms he would be ashamed; and, moreover, he works for

the benefit of mankind just as does a factory machine.
“So far as in me

lies,” says he, “I will give you pleasure.” True, he is a pauper, and

nothing but a pauper; but, at least he is an HONOURABLE pauper.
Though

tired and hungry, he still goes on working--working in his own peculiar

fashion, yet still doing honest labour.
Yes, many a decent fellow whose

labour may be disproportionate to its utility pulls the forelock to no

one, and begs his bread of no one.
I myself resemble that organ-grinder.
That is to say, though not exactly he, I resemble him in this respect,

that I work according to my capabilities, and so far as in me lies.
More

could be asked of no one; nor ought I to be adjudged to do more.
Apropos of the organ-grinder, I may tell you, dearest, that today

I experienced a double misfortune.
As I was looking at the grinder,

certain thoughts entered my head and I stood wrapped in a reverie.
Some

cabmen also had halted at the spot, as well as a young girl, with a

yet smaller girl who was dressed in rags and tatters.
These people had

halted there to listen to the organ-grinder, who was playing in front

of some one’s windows.
Next, I caught sight of a little urchin of about

ten--a boy who would have been good-looking but for the fact that his

face was pinched and sickly.
Almost barefooted, and clad only in a

shirt, he was standing agape to listen to the music--a pitiful childish

figure.
Nearer to the grinder a few more urchins were dancing, but

in the case of this lad his hands and feet looked numbed, and he kept

biting the end of his sleeve and shivering.
Also, I noticed that in his

hands he had a paper of some sort.
Presently a gentleman came by, and

tossed the grinder a small coin, which fell straight into a box adorned

with a representation of a Frenchman and some ladies.
The instant he

heard the rattle of the coin, the boy started, looked timidly round, and

evidently made up his mind that I had thrown the money; whereupon, he

ran to me with his little hands all shaking, and said in a tremulous

voice as he proffered me his paper: “Pl-please sign this.” I turned over

the paper, and saw that there was written on it what is usual under

such circumstances.
“Kind friends I am a sick mother with three hungry

children.
Pray help me.
Though soon I shall be dead, yet, if you will

not forget my little ones in this world, neither will I forget you in

the world that is to come.” The thing seemed clear enough; it was a

matter of life and death.
Yet what was I to give the lad?
Well, I gave

him nothing.
But my heart ached for him.
I am certain that, shivering

with cold though he was, and perhaps hungry, the poor lad was not lying.
No, no, he was not lying.
The shameful point is that so many mothers

take no care of their children, but send them out, half-clad, into the

cold.
Perhaps this lad’s mother also was a feckless old woman, and

devoid of character?
Or perhaps she had no one to work for her, but was

forced to sit with her legs crossed--a veritable invalid?
Or perhaps she

was just an old rogue who was in the habit of sending out pinched and

hungry boys to deceive the public?
What would such a boy learn from

begging letters?
His heart would soon be rendered callous, for, as he

ran about begging, people would pass him by and give him nothing.
Yes,

their hearts would be as stone, and their replies rough and harsh.
“Away

with you!” they would say.
“You are seeking but to trick us.” He would

hear that from every one, and his heart would grow hard, and he would

shiver in vain with the cold, like some poor little fledgling that has

fallen out of the nest.
His hands and feet would be freezing, and his

breath coming with difficulty; until, look you, he would begin to cough,

and disease, like an unclean parasite, would worm its way into his

breast until death itself had overtaken him--overtaken him in some

foetid corner whence there was no chance of escape.
Yes, that is what

his life would become.
There are many such cases.
Ah, Barbara, it is

hard to hear “For Christ’s sake!” and yet pass the suppliant by and give

nothing, or say merely: “May the Lord give unto you!” Of course, SOME

supplications mean nothing (for supplications differ greatly in

character).
Occasionally supplications are long, drawn-out and drawling,

stereotyped and mechanical--they are purely begging supplications.
Requests of this kind it is less hard to refuse, for they are purely

professional and of long standing.
“The beggar is overdoing it,” one

thinks to oneself.
“He knows the trick too well.” But there are other

supplications which voice a strange, hoarse, unaccustomed note, like

that today when I took the poor boy’s paper.
He had been standing by the

kerbstone without speaking to anybody--save that at last to myself he

said, “For the love of Christ give me a groat!” in a voice so hoarse and

broken that I started, and felt a queer sensation in my heart, although

I did not give him a groat.
Indeed, I had not a groat on me.
Rich folk

dislike hearing poor people complain of their poverty.
“They disturb

us,” they say, “and are impertinent as well.
Why should poverty be so

impertinent?
Why should its hungry moans prevent us from sleeping?”



To tell you the truth, my darling, I have written the foregoing not

merely to relieve my feelings, but, also, still more, to give you an

example of the excellent style in which I can write.
You yourself will

recognise that my style was formed long ago, but of late such fits of

despondency have seized upon me that my style has begun to correspond

to my feelings; and though I know that such correspondence gains one

little, it at least renders one a certain justice.
For not unfrequently

it happens that, for some reason or another, one feels abased, and

inclined to value oneself at nothing, and to account oneself lower than

a dishclout; but this merely arises from the fact that at the time one

is feeling harassed and depressed, like the poor boy who today asked of

me alms.
Let me tell you an allegory, dearest, and do you hearken to it.
Often, as I hasten to the office in the morning, I look around me at

the city--I watch it awaking, getting out of bed, lighting its fires,

cooking its breakfast, and becoming vocal; and at the sight, I begin to

feel smaller, as though some one had dealt me a rap on my inquisitive

nose.
Yes, at such times I slink along with a sense of utter humiliation

in my heart.
For one would have but to see what is passing within those

great, black, grimy houses of the capital, and to penetrate within their

walls, for one at once to realise what good reason there is for self-

depredation and heart-searching.
Of course, you will note that I am

speaking figuratively rather than literally.
Let us look at what is

passing within those houses.
In some dingy corner, perhaps, in some damp

kennel which is supposed to be a room, an artisan has just awakened from

sleep.
All night he has dreamt--IF such an insignificant fellow is

capable of dreaming?--about the shoes which last night he mechanically

cut out.
He is a master-shoemaker, you see, and therefore able to think

of nothing but his one subject of interest.
Nearby are some squalling

children and a hungry wife.
Nor is he the only man that has to greet the

day in this fashion.
Indeed, the incident would be nothing--it would not

be worth writing about, save for another circumstance.
In that same

house ANOTHER person--a person of great wealth--may also have been

dreaming of shoes; but, of shoes of a very different pattern and fashion

(in a manner of speaking, if you understand my metaphor, we are all of

us shoemakers).
This, again, would be nothing, were it not that the rich

person has no one to whisper in his ear: “Why dost thou think of such

things?
Why dost thou think of thyself alone, and live only for thyself-

-thou who art not a shoemaker?
THY children are not ailing.
THY wife is

not hungry.
Look around thee.
Can’st thou not find a subject more

fitting for thy thoughts than thy shoes?” That is what I want to say to

you in allegorical language, Barbara.
Maybe it savours a little of free-

thought, dearest; but, such ideas WILL keep arising in my mind and

finding utterance in impetuous speech.
Why, therefore, should one not

value oneself at a groat as one listens in fear and trembling to the

roar and turmoil of the city?
Maybe you think that I am exaggerating

things--that this is a mere whim of mine, or that I am quoting from a

book?
No, no, Barbara.
You may rest assured that it is not so.
Exaggeration I abhor, with whims I have nothing to do, and of quotation

I am guiltless.
I arrived home today in a melancholy mood.
Sitting down to the table, I

had warmed myself some tea, and was about to drink a second glass of it,

when there entered Gorshkov, the poor lodger.
Already, this morning,

I had noticed that he was hovering around the other lodgers, and also

seeming to want to speak to myself.
In passing I may say that his

circumstances are infinitely worse than my own; for, only think of it,

he has a wife and children!
Indeed, if I were he, I do not know what

I should do.
Well, he entered my room, and bowed to me with the pus

standing, as usual, in drops on his eyelashes, his feet shuffling about,

and his tongue unable, at first, to articulate a word.
I motioned him to

a chair (it was a dilapidated enough one, but I had no other), and asked

him to have a glass of tea.
To this he demurred--for quite a long time

he demurred, but at length he accepted the offer.
Next, he was for

drinking the tea without sugar, and renewed his excuses, but upon

the sugar I insisted.
After long resistance and many refusals, he DID

consent to take some, but only the smallest possible lump; after which,

he assured me that his tea was perfectly sweet.
To what depths of

humility can poverty reduce a man!
“Well, what is it, my good sir?” I

inquired of him; whereupon he replied: “It is this, Makar Alexievitch.
You have once before been my benefactor.
Pray again show me the charity

of God, and assist my unfortunate family.
My wife and children have

nothing to eat.
To think that a father should have to say this!” I was

about to speak again when he interrupted me.
“You see,” he continued,

“I am afraid of the other lodgers here.
That is to say, I am not so much

afraid of, as ashamed to address them, for they are a proud, conceited

lot of men.
Nor would I have troubled even you, my friend and former

benefactor, were it not that I know that you yourself have experienced

misfortune and are in debt; wherefore, I have ventured to come and make

this request of you, in that I know you not only to be kind-hearted, but

also to be in need, and for that reason the more likely to sympathise

with me in my distress.” To this he added an apology for his awkwardness

and presumption.
I replied that, glad though I should have been to

serve him, I had nothing, absolutely nothing, at my disposal.
“Ah, Makar

Alexievitch,” he went on, “surely it is not much that I am asking of

you?
My-my wife and children are starving.
C-could you not afford me

just a grivennik?” At that my heart contracted, “How these people put me

to shame!” thought I.
But I had only twenty kopecks left, and upon them

I had been counting for meeting my most pressing requirements.
“No, good

sir, I cannot,” said I.
“Well, what you will,” he persisted.
“Perhaps

ten kopecks?” Well I got out my cash-box, and gave him the twenty.
It

was a good deed.
To think that such poverty should exist!
Then I had

some further talk with him.
“How is it,” I asked him, “that, though you

are in such straits, you have hired a room at five roubles?” He replied

that though, when he engaged the room six months ago, he paid three

months’ rent in advance, his affairs had subsequently turned out badly,

and never righted themselves since.
You see, Barbara, he was sued at

law by a merchant who had defrauded the Treasury in the matter of a

contract.
When the fraud was discovered the merchant was prosecuted, but

the transactions in which he had engaged involved Gorshkov, although

the latter had been guilty only of negligence, want of prudence, and

culpable indifference to the Treasury’s interests.
True, the affair had

taken place some years ago, but various obstacles had since combined

to thwart Gorshkov.
“Of the disgrace put upon me,” said he to me, “I am

innocent.
True, I to a certain extent disobeyed orders, but never did

I commit theft or embezzlement.” Nevertheless the affair lost him

his character.
He was dismissed the service, and though not adjudged

capitally guilty, has been unable since to recover from the merchant a

large sum of money which is his by right, as spared to him (Gorshkov)

by the legal tribunal.
True, the tribunal in question did not altogether

believe in Gorshkov, but I do so.
The matter is of a nature so complex

and crooked that probably a hundred years would be insufficient to

unravel it; and, though it has now to a certain extent been cleared up,

the merchant still holds the key to the situation.
Personally I side

with Gorshkov, and am very sorry for him.
Though lacking a post of any

kind, he still refuses to despair, though his resources are completely

exhausted.
Yes, it is a tangled affair, and meanwhile he must live, for,

unfortunately, another child which has been born to him has entailed

upon the family fresh expenses.
Also, another of his children recently

fell ill and died--which meant yet further expense.
Lastly, not only is

his wife in bad health, but he himself is suffering from a complaint of

long standing.
In short, he has had a very great deal to undergo.
Yet he

declares that daily he expects a favourable issue to his affair--that he

has no doubt of it whatever.
I am terribly sorry for him, and said what

I could to give him comfort, for he is a man who has been much bullied

and misled.
He had come to me for protection from his troubles, so I did

my best to soothe him.
Now, goodbye, my darling.
May Christ watch over

you and preserve your health.
Dearest one, even to think of you is like

medicine to my ailing soul.
Though I suffer for you, I at least suffer

gladly.--Your true friend,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
September 9th.
MY DEAREST BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--I am beside myself as I take up my pen,

for a most terrible thing has happened.
My head is whirling round.
Ah,

beloved, how am I to tell you about it all?
I had never foreseen what

has happened.
But no--I cannot say that I had NEVER foreseen it, for my

mind DID get an inkling of what was coming, through my seeing something

very similar to it in a dream.
I will tell you the whole story--simply, and as God may put it into my

heart.
Today I went to the office as usual, and, upon arrival, sat down

to write.
You must know that I had been engaged on the same sort of

work yesterday, and that, while executing it, I had been approached by

Timothei Ivanovitch with an urgent request for a particular document.
“Makar Alexievitch,” he had said, “pray copy this out for me.
Copy it

as quickly and as carefully as you can, for it will require to be signed

today.” Also let me tell you, dearest, that yesterday I had not been

feeling myself, nor able to look at anything.
I had been troubled with

grave depression--my breast had felt chilled, and my head clouded.
All

the while I had been thinking of you, my darling.
Well, I set to work

upon the copying, and executed it cleanly and well, except for the

fact that, whether the devil confused my mind, or a mysterious fate so

ordained, or the occurrence was simply bound to happen, I left out a

whole line of the document, and thus made nonsense of it!
The work had

been given me too late for signature last night, so it went before his

Excellency this morning.
I reached the office at my usual hour, and sat

down beside Emelia Ivanovitch.
Here I may remark that for a long time

past I have been feeling twice as shy and diffident as I used to do; I

have been finding it impossible to look people in the face.
Let only

a chair creak, and I become more dead than alive.
Today, therefore, I

crept humbly to my seat and sat down in such a crouching posture that

Efim Akimovitch (the most touchy man in the world) said to me sotto

voce: “What on earth makes you sit like that, Makar Alexievitch?” Then

he pulled such a grimace that everyone near us rocked with laughter at

my expense.
I stopped my ears, frowned, and sat without moving, for I

found this the best method of putting a stop to such merriment.
All at

once I heard a bustle and a commotion and the sound of someone running

towards us.
Did my ears deceive me?
It was I who was being summoned in

peremptory tones!
My heart started to tremble within me, though I could

not say why.
I only know that never in my life before had it trembled

as it did then.
Still I clung to my chair--and at that moment was hardly

myself at all.
The voices were coming nearer and nearer, until they were

shouting in my ear: “Dievushkin!
Dievushkin!
Where is Dievushkin?” Then

at length I raised my eyes, and saw before me Evstafi Ivanovitch.
He

said to me: “Makar Alexievitch, go at once to his Excellency.
You have

made a mistake in a document.” That was all, but it was enough, was

it not?
I felt dead and cold as ice--I felt absolutely deprived of the

power of sensation; but, I rose from my seat and went whither I had

been bidden.
Through one room, through two rooms, through three rooms I

passed, until I was conducted into his Excellency’s cabinet itself.
Of

my thoughts at that moment I can give no exact account.
I merely saw his

Excellency standing before me, with a knot of people around him.
I have

an idea that I did not salute him--that I forgot to do so.
Indeed,

so panic-stricken was I, that my teeth were chattering and my knees

knocking together.
In the first place, I was greatly ashamed of my

appearance (a glance into a mirror on the right had frightened me with

the reflection of myself that it presented), and, in the second place, I

had always been accustomed to comport myself as though no such person

as I existed.
Probably his Excellency had never before known that I was

even alive.
Of course, he might have heard, in passing, that there was

a man named Dievushkin in his department; but never for a moment had he

had any intercourse with me.
He began angrily: “What is this you have done, sir?
Why are you not

more careful?
The document was wanted in a hurry, and you have gone

and spoiled it.
What do you think of it?”--the last being addressed

to Evstafi Ivanovitch.
More I did not hear, except for some flying

exclamations of “What negligence and carelessness!
How awkward this is!”

 and so on.
I opened my mouth to say something or other; I tried to

beg pardon, but could not.
To attempt to leave the room, I had not

the hardihood.
Then there happened something the recollection of which

causes the pen to tremble in my hand with shame.
A button of mine--the

devil take it!--a button of mine that was hanging by a single thread

suddenly broke off, and hopped and skipped and rattled and rolled until

it had reached the feet of his Excellency himself--this amid a profound

general silence!
THAT was what came of my intended self-justification

and plea for mercy!
THAT was the only answer that I had to return to my

chief!
The sequel I shudder to relate.
At once his Excellency’s

attention became drawn to my figure and costume.
I remembered what I had

seen in the mirror, and hastened to pursue the button.
Obstinacy of a

sort seized upon me, and I did my best to arrest the thing, but it

slipped away, and kept turning over and over, so that I could not grasp

it, and made a sad spectacle of myself with my awkwardness.
Then there

came over me a feeling that my last remaining strength was about to

leave me, and that all, all was lost--reputation, manhood, everything!
In both ears I seemed to hear the voices of Theresa and Phaldoni.
At

length, however, I grasped the button, and, raising and straightening

myself, stood humbly with clasped hands--looking a veritable fool!
But

no.
First of all I tried to attach the button to the ragged threads, and

smiled each time that it broke away from them, and smiled again.
In the

beginning his Excellency had turned away, but now he threw me another

glance, and I heard him say to Evstafi Ivanovitch: “What on earth is the

matter with the fellow?
Look at the figure he cuts!
Who to God is he?”

Ah, beloved, only to hear that, “Who to God is he?” Truly I had made

myself a marked man!
In reply to his Excellency Evstafi murmured: “He is

no one of any note, though his character is good.
Besides, his salary is

sufficient as the scale goes.” “Very well, then; but help him out of his

difficulties somehow,” said his Excellency.
“Give him a trifle of salary

in advance.” “It is all forestalled,” was the reply.
“He drew it some

time ago.
But his record is good.
There is nothing against him.” At this

I felt as though I were in Hell fire.
I could actually have died!
“Well,

well,” said his Excellency, “let him copy out the document a second

time.
Dievushkin, come here.
You are to make another copy of this paper,

and to make it as quickly as possible.” With that he turned to some

other officials present, issued to them a few orders, and the company

dispersed.
No sooner had they done so than his Excellency hurriedly

pulled out a pocket-book, took thence a note for a hundred roubles, and,

with the words, “Take this.
It is as much as I can afford.
Treat it as

you like,” placed the money in my hand!
At this, dearest, I started and

trembled, for I was moved to my very soul.
What next I did I hardly

know, except that I know that I seized his Excellency by the hand.
But

he only grew very red, and then--no, I am not departing by a hair’s-

breadth from the truth--it is true--that he took this unworthy hand in

his, and shook it!
Yes, he took this hand of mine in his, and shook it,

as though I had been his equal, as though I had been a general like

himself!
“Go now,” he said.
“This is all that I can do for you.
Make no

further mistakes, and I will overlook your fault.”



What I think about it is this: I beg of you and of Thedora, and had

I any children I should beg of them also, to pray ever to God for his

Excellency.
I should say to my children: “For your father you need not

pray; but for his Excellency, I bid you pray until your lives shall

end.” Yes, dear one--I tell you this in all solemnity, so hearken well

unto my words--that though, during these cruel days of our adversity,

I have nearly died of distress of soul at the sight of you and your

poverty, as well as at the sight of myself and my abasement and

helplessness, I yet care less for the hundred roubles which his

Excellency has given me than for the fact that he was good enough to

take the hand of a wretched drunkard in his own and press it.
By that

act he restored me to myself.
By that act he revived my courage, he made

life forever sweet to me....
Yes, sure am I that, sinner though I be

before the Almighty, my prayers for the happiness and prosperity of his

Excellency will yet ascend to the Heavenly Throne!...
But, my darling, for the moment I am terribly agitated and distraught.
My heart is beating as though it would burst my breast, and all my body

seems weak....
I send you forty-five roubles in notes.
Another twenty

I shall give to my landlady, and the remaining thirty-five I shall

keep--twenty for new clothes and fifteen for actual living expenses.
But

these experiences of the morning have shaken me to the core, and I

must rest awhile.
It is quiet, very quiet, here.
My breath is coming in

jerks--deep down in my breast I can hear it sobbing and trembling....
I will come and see you soon, but at the moment my head is aching with

these various sensations.
God sees all things, my darling, my priceless

treasure!--Your steadfast friend,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
September 10th.
MY BELOVED MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--I am unspeakably rejoiced at your good

fortune, and fully appreciate the kindness of your superior.
Now, take

a rest from your cares.
Only do not AGAIN spend money to no advantage.
Live as quietly and as frugally as possible, and from today begin always

to set aside something, lest misfortune again overtake you.
Do not, for

God’s sake, worry yourself--Thedora and I will get on somehow.
Why have

you sent me so much money?
I really do not need it--what I had already

would have been quite sufficient.
True, I shall soon be needing further

funds if I am to leave these lodgings, but Thedora is hoping before long

to receive repayment of an old debt.
Of course, at least TWENTY roubles

will have to be set aside for indispensable requirements, but the

remainder shall be returned to you.
Pray take care of it, Makar

Alexievitch.
Now, goodbye.
May your life continue peacefully, and may

you preserve your health and spirits.
I would have written to you at

greater length had I not felt so terribly weary.
Yesterday I never left

my bed.
I am glad that you have promised to come and see me.
Yes, you

MUST pay me a visit.
B. D.









September 11th.
MY DARLING BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--I implore you not to leave me now that

I am once more happy and contented.
Disregard what Thedora says, and I

will do anything in the world for you.
I will behave myself better, even

if only out of respect for his Excellency, and guard my every action.
Once more we will exchange cheerful letters with one another, and make

mutual confidence of our thoughts and joys and sorrows (if so be that

we shall know any more sorrows?).
Yes, we will live twice as happily

and comfortably as of old.
Also, we will exchange books.... Angel of my

heart, a great change has taken place in my fortunes--a change very much

for the better.
My landlady has become more accommodating; Theresa has

recovered her senses; even Phaldoni springs to do my bidding.
Likewise,

I have made my peace with Rataziaev.
He came to see me of his own

accord, the moment that he heard the glad tidings.
There can be no doubt

that he is a good fellow, that there is no truth in the slanders that

one hears of him.
For one thing, I have discovered that he never had

any intention of putting me and yourself into a book.
This he told me

himself, and then read to me his latest work.
As for his calling me

“Lovelace,” he had intended no rudeness or indecency thereby.
The term

is merely one of foreign derivation, meaning a clever fellow, or, in

more literary and elegant language, a gentleman with whom one must

reckon.
That is all; it was a mere harmless jest, my beloved.
Only

ignorance made me lose my temper, and I have expressed to him my

regret.... How beautiful is the weather today, my little Barbara!
True,

there was a slight frost in the early morning, as though scattered

through a sieve, but it was nothing, and the breeze soon freshened the

air.
I went out to buy some shoes, and obtained a splendid pair.
Then,

after a stroll along the Nevski Prospect, I read “The Daily Bee”.
This

reminds me that I have forgotten to tell you the most important thing of

all.
It happened like this:



This morning I had a talk with Emelia Ivanovitch and Aksenti

Michaelovitch concerning his Excellency.
Apparently, I am not the only

person to whom he has acted kindly and been charitable, for he is known

to the whole world for his goodness of heart.
In many quarters his

praises are to be heard; in many quarters he has called forth tears

of gratitude.
Among other things, he undertook the care of an orphaned

girl, and married her to an official, the son of a poor widow, and found

this man place in a certain chancellory, and in other ways benefited

him.
Well, dearest, I considered it to be my duty to add my mite by

publishing abroad the story of his Excellency’s gracious treatment of

myself.
Accordingly, I related the whole occurrence to my interlocutors,

and concealed not a single detail.
In fact, I put my pride into my

pocket--though why should I feel ashamed of having been elated by such

an occurrence?
“Let it only be noised afield,” said I to myself, and it

will resound greatly to his Excellency’s credit.--So I expressed myself

enthusiastically on the subject and never faltered.
On the contrary,

I felt proud to have such a story to tell.
I referred to every one

concerned (except to yourself, of course, dearest)--to my landlady, to

Phaldoni, to Rataziaev, to Markov.
I even mentioned the matter of my

shoes!
Some of those standing by laughed--in fact every one present did

so, but probably it was my own figure or the incident of my shoes--more

particularly the latter--that excited merriment, for I am sure it was

not meant ill-naturedly.
My hearers may have been young men, or well

off; certainly they cannot have been laughing with evil intent at what

I had said.
Anything against his Excellency CANNOT have been in their

thoughts.
Eh, Barbara?
Even now I cannot wholly collect my faculties, so upset am I by recent

events.... Have you any fuel to go on with, Barbara?
You must not expose

yourself to cold.
Also, you have depressed my spirits with your fears

for the future.
Daily I pray to God on your behalf.
Ah, HOW I pray

to Him!...
Likewise, have you any woollen stockings to wear, and warm

clothes generally?
Mind you, if there is anything you need, you must

not hurt an old man’s feelings by failing to apply to him for what you

require.
The bad times are gone now, and the future is looking bright

and fair.
But what bad times they were, Barbara, even though they be gone, and

can no longer matter!
As the years pass on we shall gradually recover

ourselves.
How clearly I remember my youth!
In those days I never had

a kopeck to spare.
Yet, cold and hungry though I was, I was always

light-hearted.
In the morning I would walk the Nevski Prospect, and meet

nice-looking people, and be happy all day.
Yes, it was a glorious, a

glorious time!
It was good to be alive, especially in St. Petersburg.
Yet it is but yesterday that I was beseeching God with tears to pardon

me my sins during the late sorrowful period--to pardon me my murmurings

and evil thoughts and gambling and drunkenness.
And you I remembered in

my prayers, for you alone have encouraged and comforted me, you alone

have given me advice and instruction.
I shall never forget that,

dearest.
Today I gave each one of your letters a kiss.... Goodbye,

beloved.
I have been told that there is going to be a sale of clothing

somewhere in this neighbourhood.
Once more goodbye, goodbye, my

angel--Yours in heart and soul,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
September 15th.
MY DEAREST MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--I am in terrible distress.
I feel sure

that something is about to happen.
The matter, my beloved friend, is

that Monsieur Bwikov is again in St. Petersburg, for Thedora has met

him.
He was driving along in a drozhki, but, on meeting Thedora, he

ordered the coachman to stop, sprang out, and inquired of her where she

was living; but this she would not tell him.
Next, he said with a

smile that he knew quite well who was living with her (evidently Anna

Thedorovna had told him); whereupon Thedora could hold out no longer,

but then and there, in the street, railed at and abused him--telling him

that he was an immoral man, and the cause of all my misfortunes.
To

this he replied that a person who did not possess a groat must surely be

rather badly off; to which Thedora retorted that I could always either

live by the labour of my hands or marry--that it was not so much a

question of my losing posts as of my losing my happiness, the ruin of

which had led almost to my death.
In reply he observed that, though

I was still quite young, I seemed to have lost my wits, and that my

“virtue appeared to be under a cloud” (I quote his exact words).
Both

I and Thedora had thought that he does not know where I live; but,

last night, just as I had left the house to make a few purchases in the

Gostinni Dvor, he appeared at our rooms (evidently he had not wanted to

find me at home), and put many questions to Thedora concerning our way

of living.
Then, after inspecting my work, he wound up with: “Who is

this tchinovnik friend of yours?” At the moment you happened to be

passing through the courtyard, so Thedora pointed you out, and the man

peered at you, and laughed.
Thedora next asked him to depart--telling

him that I was still ill from grief, and that it would give me great

pain to see him there; to which, after a pause, he replied that he had

come because he had had nothing better to do.
Also, he was for giving

Thedora twenty-five roubles, but, of course, she declined them.
What

does it all mean?
Why has he paid this visit?
I cannot understand his

getting to know about me.
I am lost in conjecture.
Thedora, however,

says that Aksinia, her sister-in-law (who sometimes comes to see her),

is acquainted with a laundress named Nastasia, and that this woman has

a cousin in the position of watchman to a department of which a certain

friend of Anna Thedorovna’s nephew forms one of the staff.
Can it be,

therefore, that an intrigue has been hatched through THIS channel?
But

Thedora may be entirely mistaken.
We hardly know what to think.
What if

he should come again?
The very thought terrifies me.
When Thedora told

me of this last night such terror seized upon me that I almost swooned

away.
What can the man be wanting?
At all events, I refuse to know such

people.
What have they to do with my wretched self?
Ah, how I am haunted

with anxiety, for every moment I keep thinking that Bwikov is at hand!
WHAT will become of me?
WHAT MORE has fate in store for me?
For Christ’s

sake come and see me, Makar Alexievitch!
For Christ’s sake come and see

me soon!
September 18th.
MY BELOVED BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--Today there took place in this house

a most lamentable, a most mysterious, a most unlooked-for occurrence.
First of all, let me tell you that poor Gorshkov has been entirely

absolved of guilt.
The decision has been long in coming, but this

morning he went to hear the final resolution read.
It was entirely in

his favour.
Any culpability which had been imputed to him for negligence

and irregularity was removed by the resolution.
Likewise, he was

authorised to recover of the merchant a large sum of money.
Thus, he

stands entirely justified, and has had his character cleansed from

all stain.
In short, he could not have wished for a more complete

vindication.
When he arrived home at three o’clock he was looking as

white as a sheet, and his lips were quivering.
Yet there was a smile on

his face as he embraced his wife and children.
In a body the rest of us

ran to congratulate him, and he was greatly moved by the act.
Bowing to

us, he pressed our hands in turn.
As he did so I thought, somehow, that

he seemed to have grown taller and straighter, and that the pus-drops

seemed to have disappeared from his eyelashes.
Yet how agitated he was,

poor fellow!
He could not rest quietly for two minutes together, but

kept picking up and then dropping whatsoever came to his hand, and

bowing and smiling without intermission, and sitting down and getting

up, and again sitting down, and chattering God only knows what about his

honour and his good name and his little ones.
How he did talk--yes, and

weep too!
Indeed, few of ourselves could refrain from tears; although

Rataziaev remarked (probably to encourage Gorshkov) that honour mattered

nothing when one had nothing to eat, and that money was the chief thing

in the world, and that for it alone ought God to be thanked.
Then he

slapped Gorshkov on the shoulder, but I thought that Gorshkov somehow

seemed hurt at this.
He did not express any open displeasure, but threw

Rataziaev a curious look, and removed his hand from his shoulder.
ONCE

upon a time he would not have acted thus; but characters differ.
For

example, I myself should have hesitated, at such a season of rejoicing,

to seem proud, even though excessive deference and civility at such a

moment might have been construed as a lapse both of moral courage and of

mental vigour.
However, this is none of my business.
All that Gorshkov

said was: “Yes, money IS a good thing, glory be to God!” In fact, the

whole time that we remained in his room he kept repeating to himself:

“Glory be to God, glory be to God!” His wife ordered a richer and more

delicate meal than usual, and the landlady herself cooked it, for at

heart she is not a bad woman.
But until the meal was served Gorshkov

could not remain still.
He kept entering everyone’s room in turn

(whether invited thither or not), and, seating himself smilingly upon

a chair, would sometimes say something, and sometimes not utter a word,

but get up and go out again.
In the naval officer’s room he even took a

pack of playing-cards into his hand, and was thereupon invited to make

a fourth in a game; but after losing a few times, as well as making

several blunders in his play, he abandoned the pursuit.
“No,” said he,

“that is the sort of man that I am--that is all that I am good for,” and

departed.
Next, encountering myself in the corridor, he took my hands in

his, and gazed into my face with a rather curious air.
Then he pressed

my hands again, and moved away still smiling, smiling, but in an odd,

weary sort of manner, much as a corpse might smile.
Meanwhile his wife

was weeping for joy, and everything in their room was decked in holiday

guise.
Presently dinner was served, and after they had dined Gorshkov

said to his wife: “See now, dearest, I am going to rest a little while;”

 and with that went to bed.
Presently he called his little daughter to

his side, and, laying his hand upon the child’s head, lay a long while

looking at her.
Then he turned to his wife again, and asked her: “What

of Petinka?
Where is our Petinka?” whereupon his wife crossed herself,

and replied: “Why, our Petinka is dead!” “Yes, yes, I know--of course,”

 said her husband.
“Petinka is now in the Kingdom of Heaven.” This showed

his wife that her husband was not quite in his right senses--that the

recent occurrence had upset him; so she said: “My dearest, you must

sleep awhile.” “I will do so,” he replied, “--at once--I am rather--”

 And he turned over, and lay silent for a time.
Then again he turned

round and tried to say something, but his wife could not hear what it

was.
“What do you say?” she inquired, but he made no reply.
Then again

she waited a few moments until she thought to herself, “He has gone to

sleep,” and departed to spend an hour with the landlady.
At the end

of that hour she returned--only to find that her husband had not yet

awoken, but was still lying motionless.
“He is sleeping very soundly,”

 she reflected as she sat down and began to work at something or other.
Since then she has told us that when half an hour or so had elapsed she

fell into a reverie.
What she was thinking of she cannot remember, save

that she had forgotten altogether about her husband.
Then she awoke with

a curious sort of sensation at her heart.
The first thing that struck

her was the deathlike stillness of the room.
Glancing at the bed,

she perceived her husband to be lying in the same position as before.
Thereupon she approached him, turned the coverlet back, and saw that he

was stiff and cold--that he had died suddenly, as though smitten with a

stroke.
But of what precisely he died God only knows.
The affair has so

terribly impressed me that even now I cannot fully collect my

thoughts.
It would scarcely be believed that a human being could die so

simply--and he such a poor, needy wretch, this Gorshkov!
What a

fate, what a fate, to be sure!
His wife is plunged in tears and

panic-stricken, while his little daughter has run away somewhere to hide

herself.
In their room, however, all is bustle and confusion, for the

doctors are about to make an autopsy on the corpse.
But I cannot

tell you things for certain; I only know that I am most grieved, most

grieved.
How sad to think that one never knows what even a day,

what even an hour, may bring forth!
One seems to die to so little

purpose!...--Your own



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
September 19th.
MY BELOVED BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--I hasten to let you know that Rataziaev

has found me some work to do for a certain writer--the latter having

submitted to him a large manuscript.
Glory be to God, for this means a

large amount of work to do.
Yet, though the copy is wanted in haste, the

original is so carelessly written that I hardly know how to set about my

task.
Indeed, certain parts of the manuscript are almost undecipherable.
I have agreed to do the work for forty kopecks a sheet.
You see

therefore (and this is my true reason for writing to you), that we shall

soon be receiving money from an extraneous source.
Goodbye now, as I

must begin upon my labours.--Your sincere friend,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
September 23rd.
MY DEAREST MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--I have not written to you these three

days past for the reason that I have been so worried and alarmed.
Three days ago Bwikov came again to see me.
At the time I was alone, for

Thedora had gone out somewhere.
As soon as I opened the door the sight

of him so terrified me that I stood rooted to the spot, and could feel

myself turning pale.
Entering with his usual loud laugh, he took a

chair, and sat down.
For a long while I could not collect my thoughts;

I just sat where I was, and went on with my work.
Soon his smile faded,

for my appearance seemed somehow to have struck him.
You see, of late I

have grown thin, and my eyes and cheeks have fallen in, and my face has

become as white as a sheet; so that anyone who knew me a year ago would

scarcely recognise me now.
After a prolonged inspection, Bwikov seemed

to recover his spirits, for he said something to which I duly replied.
Then again he laughed.
Thus he sat for a whole hour--talking to me the

while, and asking me questions about one thing and another.
At length,

just before he rose to depart, he took me by the hand, and said (to

quote his exact words): “Between ourselves, Barbara Alexievna, that

kinswoman of yours and my good friend and acquaintance--I refer to

Anna Thedorovna--is a very bad woman,” (he also added a grosser term

of opprobrium).
“First of all she led your cousin astray, and then she

ruined yourself.
I also have behaved like a villain, but such is the way

of the world.” Again he laughed.
Next, having remarked that, though

not a master of eloquence, he had always considered that obligations of

gentility obliged him to have with me a clear and outspoken explanation,

he went on to say that he sought my hand in marriage; that he looked

upon it as a duty to restore to me my honour; that he could offer me

riches; that, after marriage, he would take me to his country seat in

the Steppes, where we would hunt hares; that he intended never to visit

St. Petersburg again, since everything there was horrible, and he had to

entertain a worthless nephew whom he had sworn to disinherit in favour

of a legal heir; and, finally, that it was to obtain such a legal heir

that he was seeking my hand in marriage.
Lastly, he remarked that

I seemed to be living in very poor circumstances (which was not

surprising, said he, in view of the kennel that I inhabited); that I

should die if I remained a month longer in that den; that all lodgings

in St. Petersburg were detestable; and that he would be glad to know if

I was in want of anything.
So thunderstruck was I with the proposal that I could only burst into

tears.
These tears he interpreted as a sign of gratitude, for he told

me that he had always felt assured of my good sense, cleverness, and

sensibility, but that hitherto he had hesitated to take this step until

he should have learned precisely how I was getting on.
Next he asked me

some questions about YOU; saying that he had heard of you as a man of

good principle, and that since he was unwilling to remain your debtor,

would a sum of five hundred roubles repay you for all you had done for

me?
To this I replied that your services to myself had been such as

could never be requited with money; whereupon, he exclaimed that I was

talking rubbish and nonsense; that evidently I was still young enough to

read poetry; that romances of this kind were the undoing of young girls,

that books only corrupted morality, and that, for his part, he could not

abide them.
“You ought to live as long as I have done,” he added, “and

THEN you will see what men can be.” With that he requested me to give

his proposal my favourable consideration--saying that he would not like

me to take such an important step unguardedly, since want of thought and

impetuosity often spelt ruin to youthful inexperience, but that he hoped

to receive an answer in the affirmative.
“Otherwise,” said he, “I shall

have no choice but to marry a certain merchant’s daughter in Moscow, in

order that I may keep my vow to deprive my nephew of the inheritance.”--

Then he pressed five hundred roubles into my hand--to buy myself some

bonbons, as he phrased it--and wound up by saying that in the country I

should grow as fat as a doughnut or a cheese rolled in butter; that at

the present moment he was extremely busy; and that, deeply engaged in

business though he had been all day, he had snatched the present

opportunity of paying me a visit.
At length he departed.
For a long time I sat plunged in reflection.
Great though my distress

of mind was, I soon arrived at a decision.... My friend, I am going to

marry this man; I have no choice but to accept his proposal.
If anyone

could save me from this squalor, and restore to me my good name, and

avert from me future poverty and want and misfortune, he is the man to

do it.
What else have I to look for from the future?
What more am I to

ask of fate?
Thedora declares that one need NEVER lose one’s happiness;

but what, I ask HER, can be called happiness under such circumstances as

mine?
At all events I see no other road open, dear friend.
I see nothing

else to be done.
I have worked until I have ruined my health.
I cannot

go on working forever.
Shall I go out into the world?
Nay; I am worn to

a shadow with grief, and become good for nothing.
Sickly by nature, I

should merely be a burden upon other folks.
Of course this marriage will

not bring me paradise, but what else does there remain, my friend--what

else does there remain?
What other choice is left?
I had not asked your advice earlier for the reason that I wanted to

think the matter over alone.
However, the decision which you have just

read is unalterable, and I am about to announce it to Bwikov himself,

who in any case has pressed me for a speedy reply, owing to the fact (so

he says) that his business will not wait nor allow him to remain here

longer, and that therefore, no trifle must be allowed to stand in its

way.
God alone knows whether I shall be happy, but my fate is in His

holy, His inscrutable hand, and I have so decided.
Bwikov is said to be

kind-hearted.
He will at least respect me, and perhaps I shall be

able to return that respect.
What more could be looked for from such a

marriage?
I have now told you all, Makar Alexievitch, and feel sure that you will

understand my despondency.
Do not, however, try to divert me from my

intention, for all your efforts will be in vain.
Think for a moment;

weigh in your heart for a moment all that has led me to take this step.
At first my anguish was extreme, but now I am quieter.
What awaits me I

know not.
What must be must be, and as God may send....



Bwikov has just arrived, so I am leaving this letter unfinished.
Otherwise I had much else to say to you.
Bwikov is even now at the

door!...
September 23rd.
MY BELOVED BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--I hasten to reply to you--I hasten to

express to you my extreme astonishment....
In passing, I may mention

that yesterday we buried poor Gorshkov....
Yes, Bwikov has acted nobly,

and you have no choice but to accept him.
All things are in God’s hands.
This is so, and must always be so; and the purposes of the Divine

Creator are at once good and inscrutable, as also is Fate, which is one

with Him.... Thedora will share your happiness--for, of course, you will

be happy, and free from want, darling, dearest, sweetest of angels!
But

why should the matter be so hurried?
Oh, of course--Monsieur Bwikov’s

business affairs.
Only a man who has no affairs to see to can afford to

disregard such things.
I got a glimpse of Monsieur Bwikov as he was

leaving your door.
He is a fine-looking man--a very fine-looking man;

though that is not the point that I should most have noticed had I been

quite myself at the time....
In the future shall we be able to write letters to one another?
I keep

wondering and wondering what has led you to say all that you have said.
To think that just when twenty pages of my copying are completed THIS

has happened!...
I suppose you will be able to make many purchases

now--to buy shoes and dresses and all sorts of things?
Do you remember

the shops in Gorokhovaia Street of which I used to speak?...
But no.
You ought not to go out at present--you simply ought not to, and

shall not.
Presently, you will he able to buy many, many things, and to,

keep a carriage.
Also, at present the weather is bad.
Rain is descending

in pailfuls, and it is such a soaking kind of rain that--that you might

catch cold from it, my darling, and the chill might go to your heart.
Why should your fear of this man lead you to take such risks when all

the time I am here to do your bidding?
So Thedora declares great

happiness to be awaiting you, does she?
She is a gossiping old woman,

and evidently desires to ruin you.
Shall you be at the all-night Mass

this evening, dearest?
I should like to come and see you there.
Yes,

Bwikov spoke but the truth when he said that you are a woman of virtue,

wit, and good feeling.
Yet I think he would do far better to marry the

merchant’s daughter.
What think YOU about it?
Yes, ‘twould be far better

for him.
As soon as it grows dark tonight I mean to come and sit with

you for an hour.
Tonight twilight will close in early, so I shall soon

be with you.
Yes, come what may, I mean to see you for an hour.
At

present, I suppose, you are expecting Bwikov, but I will come as soon as

he has gone.
So stay at home until I have arrived, dearest.
MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
September 27th.
DEAR MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--Bwikov has just informed me that I must have

at least three dozen linen blouses; so I must go at once and look for

sempstresses to make two out of the three dozen, since time presses.
Indeed, Monsieur Bwikov is quite angry about the fuss which these

fripperies are entailing, seeing that there remain but five days before

the wedding, and we are to depart on the following day.
He keeps rushing

about and declaring that no time ought to be wasted on trifles.
I am

terribly worried, and scarcely able to stand on my feet.
There is

so much to do, and, perhaps, so much that were better left undone!
Moreover, I have no blond or other lace; so THERE is another item to be

purchased, since Bwikov declares that he cannot have his bride look

like a cook, but, on the contrary, she must “put the noses of the great

ladies out of joint.” That is his expression.
I wish, therefore, that

you would go to Madame Chiffon’s, in Gorokhovaia Street, and ask her, in

the first place, to send me some sempstresses, and, in the second place,

to give herself the trouble of coming in person, as I am too ill to

go out.
Our new flat is very cold, and still in great disorder.
Also,

Bwikov has an aunt who is at her last gasp through old age, and may die

before our departure.
He himself, however, declares this to be nothing,

and says that she will soon recover.
He is not yet living with me, and

I have to go running hither and thither to find him.
Only Thedora

is acting as my servant, together with Bwikov’s valet, who oversees

everything, but has been absent for the past three days.
Each morning Bwikov goes to business, and loses his temper.
Yesterday

he even had some trouble with the police because of his thrashing the

steward of these buildings...
I have no one to send with this letter so

I am going to post it... Ah!
I had almost forgotten the most important

point--which is that I should like you to go and tell Madame Chiffon

that I wish the blond lace to be changed in conformity with yesterday’s

patterns, if she will be good enough to bring with her a new assortment.
Also say that I have altered my mind about the satin, which I wish to

be tamboured with crochet-work; also, that tambour is to be used with

monograms on the various garments.
Do you hear?
Tambour, not smooth

work.
Do not forget that it is to be tambour.
Another thing I had almost

forgotten, which is that the lappets of the fur cloak must be raised,

and the collar bound with lace.
Please tell her these things, Makar

Alexievitch.--Your friend,



B. D.
P.S.--I am so ashamed to trouble you with my commissions!
This is the

third morning that you will have spent in running about for my sake.
But

what else am I to do?
The whole place is in disorder, and I myself

am ill. Do not be vexed with me, Makar Alexievitch.
I am feeling so

depressed!
What is going to become of me, dear friend, dear, kind, old

Makar Alexievitch?
I dread to look forward into the future.
Somehow I

feel apprehensive; I am living, as it were, in a mist.
Yet, for God’s

sake, forget none of my commissions.
I am so afraid lest you should make

a mistake!
Remember that everything is to be tambour work, not smooth.
September 27th.
MY BELOVED BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--I have carefully fulfilled your

commissions.
Madame Chiffon informs me that she herself had thought of

using tambour work as being more suitable (though I did not quite take

in all she said).
Also, she has informed me that, since you have given

certain directions in writing, she has followed them (though again I do

not clearly remember all that she said--I only remember that she said

a very great deal, for she is a most tiresome old woman).
These

observations she will soon be repeating to you in person.
For myself, I

feel absolutely exhausted, and have not been to the office today...

Do not despair about the future, dearest.
To save you trouble I would

visit every shop in St. Petersburg.
You write that you dare not look

forward into the future.
But by tonight, at seven o’clock, you will have

learned all, for Madame Chiffon will have arrived in person to see you.
Hope on, and everything will order itself for the best.
Of course, I

am referring only to these accursed gewgaws, to these frills and

fripperies!
Ah me, ah me, how glad I shall be to see you, my angel!
Yes,

how glad I shall be!
Twice already today I have passed the gates of your

abode.
Unfortunately, this Bwikov is a man of such choler that--Well,

things are as they are.
MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
September 28th.
MY DEAREST MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--For God’s sake go to the jeweller’s,

and tell him that, after all, he need not make the pearl and emerald

earrings.
Monsieur Bwikov says that they will cost him too much, that

they will burn a veritable hole in his pocket.
In fact, he has lost his

temper again, and declares that he is being robbed.
Yesterday he added

that, had he but known, but foreseen, these expenses, he would never

have married.
Also, he says that, as things are, he intends only to have

a plain wedding, and then to depart.
“You must not look for any dancing

or festivity or entertainment of guests, for our gala times are still in

the air.” Such were his words.
God knows I do not want such things, but

none the less Bwikov has forbidden them.
I made him no answer on the

subject, for he is a man all too easily irritated.
What, what is going

to become of me?
B. D.









September 28th.
MY BELOVED BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--All is well as regards the jeweller.
Unfortunately, I have also to say that I myself have fallen ill, and

cannot rise from bed.
Just when so many things need to be done, I have

gone and caught a chill, the devil take it!
Also I have to tell you

that, to complete my misfortunes, his Excellency has been pleased to

become stricter.
Today he railed at and scolded Emelia Ivanovitch until

the poor fellow was quite put about.
That is the sum of my news.
No--there is something else concerning which I should like to write

to you, but am afraid to obtrude upon your notice.
I am a simple,

dull fellow who writes down whatsoever first comes into his head--Your

friend,



MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
September 29th.
MY OWN BARBARA ALEXIEVNA,--Today, dearest, I saw Thedora, who informed

me that you are to be married tomorrow, and on the following day to go

away--for which purpose Bwikov has ordered a post-chaise....



Well, of the incident of his Excellency, I have already told you.
Also

I have verified the bill from the shop in Gorokhovaia Street.
It is

correct, but very long.
Why is Monsieur Bwikov so out of humour with

you?
Nay, but you must be of good cheer, my darling.
I am so, and shall

always be so, so long as you are happy.
I should have come to the church

tomorrow, but, alas, shall be prevented from doing so by the pain in my

loins.
Also, I would have written an account of the ceremony, but that

there will be no one to report to me the details....
Yes, you have been a very good friend to Thedora, dearest.
You have

acted kindly, very kindly, towards her.
For every such deed God will

bless you.
Good deeds never go unrewarded, nor does virtue ever fail to

win the crown of divine justice, be it early or be it late.
Much else

should I have liked to write to you.
Every hour, every minute I could

occupy in writing.
Indeed I could write to you forever!
Only your book,

“The Stories of Bielkin”, is left to me.
Do not deprive me of it, I pray

you, but suffer me to keep it.
It is not so much because I wish to read

the book for its own sake, as because winter is coming on, when the

evenings will be long and dreary, and one will want to read at least

SOMETHING.
Do you know, I am going to move from my present quarters into your old

ones, which I intend to rent from Thedora; for I could never part with

that good old woman.
Moreover, she is such a splendid worker.
Yesterday I inspected your empty room in detail, and inspected your

embroidery-frame, with the work still hanging on it.
It had been left

untouched in its corner.
Next, I inspected the work itself, of which

there still remained a few remnants, and saw that you had used one of my

letters for a spool upon which to wind your thread.
Also, on the table

I found a scrap of paper which had written on it, “My dearest Makar

Alexievitch I hasten to--” that was all.
Evidently, someone had

interrupted you at an interesting point.
Lastly, behind a screen there

was your little bed.... Oh darling of darlings!!!...
Well, goodbye now,

goodbye now, but for God’s sake send me something in answer to this

letter!
MAKAR DIEVUSHKIN.
September 30th.
MY BELOVED MAKAR ALEXIEVITCH,--All is over!
The die is cast!
What my lot

may have in store I know not, but I am submissive to the will of God.
Tomorrow, then, we depart.
For the last time, I take my leave of you, my

friend beyond price, my benefactor, my dear one!
Do not grieve for me,

but try to live happily.
Think of me sometimes, and may the blessing

of Almighty God light upon you!
For myself, I shall often have you in

remembrance, and recall you in my prayers.
Thus our time together

has come to an end.
Little comfort in my new life shall I derive

from memories of the past.
The more, therefore, shall I cherish the

recollection of you, and the dearer will you ever be to my heart.
Here,

you have been my only friend; here, you alone have loved me.
Yes, I have

seen all, I have known all--I have throughout known how well you love

me.
A single smile of mine, a single stroke from my pen, has been able

to make you happy....
But now you must forget me.... How lonely you will

be!
Why should you stay here at all, kind, inestimable, but solitary,

friend of mine?
To your care I entrust the book, the embroidery frame,

and the letter upon which I had begun.
When you look upon the few words

which the letter contains you will be able mentally to read in thought

all that you would have liked further to hear or receive from me--all

that I would so gladly have written, but can never now write.
Think

sometimes of your poor little Barbara who loved you so well.
All your

letters I have left behind me in the top drawer of Thedora’s chest of

drawers... You write that you are ill, but Monsieur Bwikov will not let

me leave the house today; so that I can only write to you.
Also, I will

write again before long.
That is a promise.
Yet God only knows when I

shall be able to do so.... Now we must bid one another forever farewell,

my friend, my beloved, my own!
Yes, it must be forever!
Ah, how at this

moment I could embrace you!
Goodbye, dear friend--goodbye, goodbye!
May

you ever rest well and happy!
To the end I shall keep you in my prayers.
How my heart is aching under its load of sorrow!...
Monsieur Bwikov is

just calling for me....--Your ever loving



B.
P.S.--My heart is full!
It is full to bursting of tears!
Sorrow has me

in its grip, and is tearing me to pieces.
Goodbye.
My God, what grief!
Do not, do not forget your poor Barbara!
BELOVED BARBARA--MY JEWEL, MY PRICELESS ONE,--You are now almost en

route, you are now just about to depart!
Would that they had torn my

heart out of my breast rather than have taken you away from me!
How

could you allow it?
You weep, yet you go!
And only this moment I have

received from you a letter stained with your tears!
It must be that

you are departing unwillingly; it must be that you are being abducted

against your will; it must be that you are sorry for me; it must be

that--that you LOVE me!...
Yet how will it fare with you now?
Your heart

will soon have become chilled and sick and depressed.
Grief will soon

have sucked away its life; grief will soon have rent it in twain!
Yes,

you will die where you be, and be laid to rest in the cold, moist earth

where there is no one to bewail you.
Monsieur Bwikov will only be

hunting hares!...
Ah, my darling, my darling!
WHY did you come to this

decision?
How could you bring yourself to take such a step?
What have

you done, have you done, have you done?
Soon they will be carrying you

away to the tomb; soon your beauty will have become defiled, my angel.
Ah, dearest one, you are as weak as a feather.
And where have I been all

this time?
What have I been thinking of?
I have treated you merely as a

forward child whose head was aching.
Fool that I was, I neither saw nor

understood.
I have behaved as though, right or wrong, the matter was in

no way my concern.
Yes, I have been running about after fripperies!...
Ah, but I WILL leave my bed.
Tomorrow I WILL rise sound and well, and be

once more myself.... Dearest, I could throw myself under the wheels of a

passing vehicle rather than that you should go like this.
By what right

is it being done?...
I will go with you; I will run behind your carriage

if you will not take me--yes, I will run, and run so long as the power

is in me, and until my breath shall have failed.
Do you know whither you

are going?
Perhaps you will not know, and will have to ask me?
Before

you there lie the Steppes, my darling--only the Steppes, the naked

Steppes, the Steppes that are as bare as the palm of my hand.
THERE

there live only heartless old women and rude peasants and drunkards.
THERE the trees have already shed their leaves.
THERE there abide but

rain and cold.
Why should you go thither?
True, Monsieur Bwikov will

have his diversions in that country--he will be able to hunt the hare;

but what of yourself?
Do you wish to become a mere estate lady?
Nay;

look at yourself, my seraph of heaven.
Are you in any way fitted for

such a role?
How could you play it?
To whom should I write letters?
To

whom should I send these missives?
Whom should I call “my darling”?
To

whom should I apply that name of endearment?
Where, too, could I find

you?
When you are gone, Barbara, I shall die--for certain I shall die,

for my heart cannot bear this misery.
I love you as I love the light of

God; I love you as my own daughter; to you I have devoted my love in its

entirety; only for you have I lived at all; only because you were near

me have I worked and copied manuscripts and committed my views to paper

under the guise of friendly letters.
Perhaps you did not know all this,

but it has been so.
How, then, my beloved, could you bring yourself to

leave me?
Nay, you MUST not go--it is impossible, it is sheerly, it is

utterly, impossible.
The rain will fall upon you, and you are weak, and

will catch cold.
The floods will stop your carriage.
No sooner will it

have passed the city barriers than it will break down, purposely break

down.
Here, in St. Petersburg, they are bad builders of carriages.
Yes,

I know well these carriage-builders.
They are jerry-builders who can

fashion a toy, but nothing that is durable.
Yes, I swear they can make

nothing that is durable.... All that I can do is to go upon my knees

before Monsieur Bwikov, and to tell him all, to tell him all.
Do you

also tell him all, dearest, and reason with him.
Tell him that you MUST

remain here, and must not go.
Ah, why did he not marry that merchant’s

daughter in Moscow?
Let him go and marry her now.
She would suit him far

better and for reasons which I well know.
Then I could keep you.
For

what is he to you, this Monsieur Bwikov?
Why has he suddenly become so

dear to your heart?
Is it because he can buy you gewgaws?
What are THEY?
What use are THEY?
They are so much rubbish.
One should consider human

life rather than mere finery.
Nevertheless, as soon as I have received

my next instalment of salary I mean to buy you a new cloak.
I mean to

buy it at a shop with which I am acquainted.
Only, you must wait until

my next installment is due, my angel of a Barbara.
Ah, God, my God!
To

think that you are going away into the Steppes with Monsieur Bwikov--

that you are going away never to return!...
Nay, nay, but you SHALL

write to me.
You SHALL write me a letter as soon as you have started,

even if it be your last letter of all, my dearest.
Yet will it be your

last letter?
How has it come about so suddenly, so irrevocably, that

this letter should be your last?
Nay, nay; I will write, and you shall

write--yes, NOW, when at length I am beginning to improve my style.
Style?
I do not know what I am writing.
I never do know what I am

writing.
I could not possibly know, for I never read over what I have

written, nor correct its orthography.
At the present moment, I am

writing merely for the sake of writing, and to put as much as possible

into this last letter of mine....



Ah, dearest, my pet, my own darling!...