LET'S GET TOGETHER



                            By ISAAC ASIMOV



                         Illustrated by ENGLE



           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from

                       Infinity, February 1957.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that

         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]
A kind of peace had endured for a century and people had forgotten what

anything else was like.
They would scarcely have known how to react had

they discovered that a kind of war had finally come.
Certainly, Elias Lynn, Chief of the Bureau of Robotics, wasn't sure

how he ought to react when _he_ finally found out.
The Bureau of

Robotics was headquartered in Cheyenne, in line with the century-old

trend toward decentralization, and Lynn stared dubiously at the young

Security officer from Washington who had brought the news.
Elias Lynn was a large man, almost charmingly homely, with pale blue

eyes that bulged a bit.
Men weren't usually comfortable under the stare

of those eyes, but the Security officer remained calm.
Lynn decided that his first reaction ought to be incredulity.
Hell, it

_was_ incredulity!
He just didn't believe it!
He eased himself back in his chair and said, "How certain is the

information?"
The Security officer, who had introduced himself as Ralph G.

Breckenridge and had presented credentials to match, had the softness

of youth about him; full lips, plump cheeks that flushed easily,

and guileless eyes.
His clothing was out of line with Cheyenne but

it suited a universally air-conditioned Washington, where Security,

despite everything, was still centered.
Breckenridge flushed and said, "There's no doubt about it."
"You people know all about Them, I suppose," said Lynn and was unable

to keep a trace of sarcasm out of his tone.
He was not particularly

aware of his use of a slightly-stressed pronoun in his reference to the

enemy, the equivalent of capitalization in print.
It was a cultural

habit of this generation and the one preceding.
No one said the "East,"

or the "Reds" or the "Soviets" or the "Russians" any more.
That would

have been too confusing, since some of Them weren't of the East,

weren't Reds, Soviets, and especially not Russians.
It was much simpler

to say We and They, and much more precise.
Travelers had frequently reported that They did the same in reverse.
Over there, They were "We" (in the appropriate language) and We were

"They."
Scarcely anyone gave thought to such things any more.
It was all quite

comfortable and casual.
There was no hatred, even.
At the beginning,

it had been called a Cold War.
Now it was only a game, almost a

good-natured game, with unspoken rules and a kind of decency about it.
Lynn said, abruptly, "Why should They want to disturb the situation?"
He rose and stood staring at a wall-map of the world, split into two

regions with faint edgings of color.
An irregular portion on the left

of the map was edged in a mild green.
A smaller, but just as irregular,

portion on the right of the map was bordered in a washed-out pink.
We

and They.
The map hadn't changed much in a century.
The loss of Formosa and

the gain of East Germany some eighty years before had been the last

territorial switch of importance.
There had been another change, though, that was significant enough and

that was in the colors.
Two generations before, Their territory had

been a brooding, bloody red, Ours a pure and undefiled white.
Now there

was a neutrality about the colors.
Lynn had seen Their maps and it was

the same on Their side.
"They wouldn't do it," he said.
"They are doing it," said Breckenridge, "and you had better accustom

yourself to the fact.
Of course, sir, I realize that it isn't pleasant

to think that they may be that far ahead of us in robotics."
His eyes remained as guileless as ever, but the hidden knife-edges of

the words plunged deep, and Lynn quivered at the impact.
Of course, that would account for why the Chief of Robotics learned of

this so late and through a Security officer at that.
He had lost caste

in the eyes of the Government; if Robotics had really failed in the

struggle, Lynn could expect no political mercy.
Lynn said wearily, "Even if what you say is true, they're not far ahead

of us.
We could build humanoid robots."
"Have we, sir?"
"Yes.
As a matter of fact, we have built a few models for experimental

purposes."
"They were doing so ten years ago.
They've made ten years' progress

since."
Lynn was disturbed.
He wondered if his incredulity concerning the whole

business were really the result of wounded pride and fear for his job

and reputation.
He was embarrassed by the possibility that this might

be so, and yet he was forced into defense.
He said, "Look, young man, the stalemate between Them and Us was never

perfect in every detail, you know.
They have always been ahead in one

facet or another and We in some other facet or another.
If They're

ahead of us right now in robotics, it's because They've placed a

greater proportion of Their effort into robotics than We have.
And that

means that some other branch of endeavor has received a greater share

of Our efforts than it has of Theirs.
It would mean We're ahead in

force-field research or in hyper-atomics, perhaps."
Lynn felt distressed at his own statement that the stalemate wasn't

perfect.
It was true enough, but that was the one great danger

threatening the world.
The world depended on the stalemate being as

perfect as possible.
If the small unevennesses that always existed

over-balanced too far in one direction or the other--



Almost at the beginning of what had been the Cold War, both sides

had developed thermonuclear weapons, and war became unthinkable.
Competition switched from the military to the economic and

psychological and had stayed there ever since.
But always there was the driving effort on each side to break the

stalemate, to develop a parry for every possible thrust, to develop

a thrust that could not be parried in time--something that would make

war possible again.
And that was not because either side wanted war so

desperately, but because both were afraid that the other side would

make the crucial discovery first.
For a hundred years each side had kept the struggle even.
And in the

process, peace had been maintained for a hundred years while, as

byproducts of the continuously intensive research, force-fields had

been produced and solar energy and insect control and robots.
Each side

was making a beginning in the understanding of mentalics, which was the

name given to the biochemistry and biophysics of thought.
Each side had

its outposts on the Moon and on Mars.
Mankind was advancing in giant

strides under forced draft.
It was even necessary for both sides to be as decent and humane as

possible among themselves, lest through cruelty and tyranny, friends be

made for the other side.
It couldn't be that the stalemate would now be broken and that there

would be war.
Lynn said, "I want to consult one of my men.
I want his opinion."
"Is he trustworthy?"
Lynn looked disgusted.
"Good Lord, what man in Robotics has not been

investigated and cleared to death by your people?
Yes, I vouch for

him.
If you can't trust a man like Humphrey Carl Laszlo, then we're in

no position to face the kind of attack you say They are launching, no

matter what else we do."
"I've heard of Laszlo," said Breckenridge.
"Good.
Does he pass?"
"Yes."
"Then, I'll have him in and we'll find out what he thinks about the

possibility that robots could invade the U. S.
A."
"Not exactly," said Breckenridge, softly.
"You still don't accept the

full truth.
Find out what he thinks about the fact that robots have

_already_ invaded the U. S.
A."
*       *       *       *       *



Laszlo was the grandson of a Hungarian who had broken through what

had then been called the Iron Curtain, and he had a comfortable

above-suspicion feeling about himself because of it.
He was thick-set

and balding with a pugnacious look graven forever on his snub face, but

his accent was clear Harvard and he was almost excessively soft-spoken.
To Lynn, who was conscious that after years of administration he was no

longer expert in the various phases of modern robotics, Laszlo was a

comforting receptacle for complete knowledge.
Lynn felt better because

of the man's mere presence.
Lynn said, "What do you think?"
A scowl twisted Laszlo's face ferociously.
"That They're that far ahead

of us.
Completely incredible.
It would mean They've produced humanoids

that could not be told from humans at close quarters.
It would mean a

considerable advance in robo-mentalics."
"You're personally involved," said Breckenridge, coldly.
"Leaving

professional pride out of account, exactly why is it impossible that

They be ahead of Us?"
Laszlo shrugged.
"I assure you that I'm well acquainted with Their

literature on robotics.
I know approximately where They are."
"You know approximately where They want you to _think_ They are, is

what you really mean," corrected Breckenridge.
"Have you ever visited

the other side?"
"I haven't," said Laszlo, shortly.
"Nor you, Dr.
Lynn?"
Lynn said, "No, I haven't, either."
Breckenridge said, "Has any robotics man visited the other side in

twenty-five years?"
He asked the question with a kind of confidence

that indicated he knew the answer.
For a matter of seconds, the atmosphere was heavy with thought.
Discomfort crossed Laszlo's broad face.
He said, "As a matter of fact,

They haven't held any conferences on robotics in a long time."
"In twenty-five years," said Breckenridge.
"Isn't that significant?"
"Maybe," said Laszlo, reluctantly.
"Something else bothers me, though.
None of Them have ever come to Our conferences on robotics.
None that I

can remember."
"Were They invited?"
asked Breckenridge.
Lynn, staring and worried, interposed quickly, "Of course."
Breckenridge said, "Do They refuse attendance to any other types of

scientific conferences We hold?"
"I don't know," said Laszlo.
He was pacing the floor now.
"I haven't

heard of any cases.
Have you, Chief?"
"No," said Lynn.
Breckenridge said, "Wouldn't you say it was as though They didn't want

to be put in the position of having to return any such invitation?
Or

as though They were afraid one of Their men might talk too much?"
That was exactly how it seemed, and Lynn felt a helpless conviction

that Security's story was true after all steal over him.
Why else had there been no contact between sides on robotics?
There

had been a cross-fertilizing trickle of researchers moving in both

directions on a strictly one-for-one basis for years, dating back

to the days of Eisenhower and Khrushchev.
There were a great many

good motives for that: an honest appreciation of the supra-national

character of science; impulses of friendliness that are hard to wipe

out completely in the individual human being; the desire to be exposed

to a fresh and interesting outlook and to have your own slightly-stale

notions greeted by others as fresh and interesting.
The governments themselves were anxious that this continue.
There was

always the obvious thought that by learning all you could and telling

as little as you could, your own side would gain by the exchange.
But not in the case of robotics.
Not there.
Such a little thing to carry conviction.
And a thing, moreover, they

had known all along.
Lynn thought, darkly: We've taken the complacent

way out.
Because the other side had done nothing publicly on robotics, it had

been tempting to sit back smugly and be comfortable in the assurance of

superiority.
Why hadn't it seemed possible, even likely, that They were

hiding superior cards, a trump hand, for the proper time?
Laszlo said, shakenly, "What do we do?"
It was obvious that the same

line of thought had carried the same conviction to him.
"Do?"
parroted Lynn.
It was hard to think right now of anything but of

the complete horror that came with conviction.
There were ten humanoid

robots somewhere in the United States, each one carrying a fragment of

a TC bomb.
TC!
The race for sheer horror in bomb-ery had ended there.
TC!
Total

Conversion!
The sun was no longer a synonym one could use.
Total

conversion made the sun a penny candle.
Ten humanoids, each completely harmless in separation, could, by the

simple act of coming together, exceed critical mass and--



Lynn rose to his feet heavily, the dark pouches under his eyes, which

ordinarily lent his ugly face a look of savage foreboding, more

prominent than ever.
"It's going to be up to us to figure out ways

and means of telling a humanoid from a human and then finding the

humanoids."
"How quickly?"
muttered Laszlo.
"Not later than five minutes before they get together," barked Lynn,

"and I don't know when that will be."
Breckenridge nodded.
"I'm glad you're with us now, sir.
I'm to bring

you back to Washington for conference, you know."
Lynn raised his eyebrows.
"All right."
He wondered if, had he delayed longer in being convinced, he might

not have been replaced forthwith--if some other Chief of the Bureau

of Robotics might not be conferring in Washington.
He suddenly wished

earnestly that exactly that had come to pass.
*       *       *       *       *



The First Presidential Assistant was there, the Secretary of Science,

the Secretary of Security, Lynn himself, and Breckenridge.
Five of them

sitting about a table in the dungeons of an underground fortress near

Washington.
Presidential Assistant Jeffreys was an impressive man, handsome in a

white-haired and just-a-trifle-jowly fashion, solid, thoughtful and as

unobtrusive, politically, as a Presidential Assistant ought to be.
He spoke incisively.
"There are three questions that face us as I see

it.
First, when are the humanoids going to get together?
Second, where

are they going to get together?
Third, how do we stop them before they

get together?"
Secretary of Science Amberley nodded convulsively at that.
He had been

Dean of Northwestern Engineering before his appointment.
He was thin,

sharp-featured and noticeably edgy.
His forefinger traced slow circles

on the table.
"As far as _when_ they'll get together," he said.
"I suppose it's

definite that it won't be for some time."
"Why do you say that?"
asked Lynn, sharply.
"They've been in the U. S. at least a month already.
So Security says."
Lynn turned automatically to look at Breckenridge, and Secretary of

Security Macalaster intercepted the glance.
Macalaster said, "The

information is reliable.
Don't let Breckenridge's apparent youth fool

you, Dr. Lynn.
That's part of his value to us.
Actually, he's 34 and

has been with the department for ten years.
He has been in Moscow for

nearly a year and without him, none of this terrible danger would be

known to us.
As it is, we have most of the details."
"Not the crucial ones," said Lynn.
Macalaster of Security smiled frostily.
His heavy chin and close-set

eyes were well-known to the public but almost nothing else about him

was.
He said, "We are all finitely human, Dr. Lynn.
Agent Breckenridge

has done a great deal."
Presidential Assistant Jeffreys cut in.
"Let us say we have a certain

amount of time.
If action at the instant were necessary, it would

have happened before this.
It seems likely that they are waiting for

a specific time.
If we knew the place, perhaps the time would become

self-evident.
"If they are going to TC a target, they will want to cripple us as much

as possible, so it would seem that a major city would have to be it.
In any case, a major metropolis is the only target worth a TC bomb.
I

think there are four possibilities: Washington, as the administrative

center; New York, as the financial center; and Detroit and Pittsburgh

as the two chief industrial centers."
Macalaster of Security said, "I vote for New York.
Administration

and industry have both been decentralized to the point where the

destruction of any one particular city won't prevent instant

retaliation."
"Then why New York?"
asked Amberly of Science, perhaps more sharply

than he intended.
"Finance has been decentralized as well."
"A question of morale.
It may be they intend to destroy our will to

resist, to induce surrender by the sheer horror of the first blow.
The greatest destruction of human life would be in the New York

Metropolitan area--"



"Pretty cold-blooded," muttered Lynn.
"I know," said Macalaster of Security, "but they're capable of it, if

they thought it would mean final victory at a stroke.
Wouldn't we--"



Presidential Assistant Jeffreys brushed back his white hair.
"Let's

assume the worst.
Let's assume that New York will be destroyed some

time during the winter, preferably immediately after a serious blizzard

when communications are at their worst and the disruption of utilities

and food supplies in fringe areas will be most serious in their effect.
Now, how do we stop them?"
Amberley of Science could only say, "Finding ten men in two hundred and

twenty million is an awfully small needle in an awfully large haystack."
Jeffreys shook his head.
"You have it wrong.
Ten humanoids among two

hundred twenty million humans."
"No difference," said Amberley of Science.
"We don't know that a

humanoid can be differentiated from a human at sight.
Probably not."
He

looked at Lynn.
They all did.
Lynn said heavily, "We in Cheyenne couldn't make one that would pass as

human in the daylight."
"But They can," said Macalaster of Security, "and not only physically.
We're sure of that.
They've advanced mentalic procedures to the point

where they can reel off the micro-electronic pattern of the brain and

focus it on the positronic pathways of the robot."
Lynn stared.
"Are you implying that they can create the replica of a

human being complete with personality and memory?"
"I do."
"Of specific human beings?"
"That's right."
"Is this also based on Agent Breckenridge's findings?"
"Yes.
The evidence can't be disputed."
Lynn bent his head in thought for a moment.
Then he said, "Then ten men

in the United States are not men but humanoids.
But the originals would

have had to be available to them.
They couldn't be Orientals, who would

be too easy to spot, so they would have to be East Europeans.
How would

they be introduced into this country, then?
With the radar network over

the entire world border as tight as a drum, how could They introduce

any individual, human or humanoid, without our knowing it?"
Macalaster of Security said, "It can be done.
There are certain

legitimate seepages across the border.
Businessmen, pilots, even

tourists.
They're watched, of course, on both sides.
Still ten of

them might have been kidnapped and used as models for humanoids.
The

humanoids would then be sent back in their place.
Since we wouldn't

expect such a substitution, it would pass us by.
If they were Americans

to begin with, there would be no difficulty in their getting into this

country.
It's as simple as that."
"And even their friends and family could not tell the difference?"
"We must assume so.
Believe me, we've been waiting for any report

that might imply sudden attacks of amnesia or troublesome changes in

personality.
We've checked on thousands."
Amberley of Science stared at his finger-tips.
"I think ordinary

measures won't work.
The attack must come from the Bureau of Robotics

and I depend on the chief of that bureau."
Again eyes turned sharply, expectantly, on Lynn.
Lynn felt bitterness rise.
It seemed to him that this was what the

conference came to and was intended for.
Nothing that had been said had

not been said before.
He was sure of that.
There was no solution to

the problem, no pregnant suggestion.
It was a device for the record, a

device on the part of men who gravely feared defeat and who wished the

responsibility for it placed clearly and unequivocally on someone else.
And yet there was justice in it.
It was in robotics that We had fallen

short.
And Lynn was not Lynn merely.
He was Lynn of Robotics and the

responsibility had to be his.
He said, "I will do what I can."
*       *       *       *       *



He spent a wakeful night and there was a haggardness about both

body and soul when he sought and attained another interview with

Presidential Assistant Jeffreys the next morning.
Breckenridge was

there, and though Lynn would have preferred a private conference,

he could see the justice in the situation.
It was obvious that

Breckenridge had attained enormous influence with the government as a

result of his successful Intelligence work.
Well, why not?
Lynn said, "Sir, I am considering the possibility that we are hopping

uselessly to enemy piping."
"In what way?"
"I'm sure that however impatient the public may grow at times, and

however legislators sometimes find it expedient to talk, the government

at least recognizes the world stalemate to be beneficial.
They must

recognize it also.
Ten humanoids with one TC bomb is a trivial way of

breaking the stalemate."
"The destruction of fifteen million human beings is scarcely trivial."
"It is from the world power standpoint.
It would not so demoralize us

as to make us surrender or so cripple us as to convince us we could not

win.
There would just be the same old planetary death-war that both

sides have avoided so long and so successfully.
And all They would have

accomplished is to force us to fight minus one city.
It's not enough."
"What do you suggest?"
said Jeffreys, coldly.
"That They do not have

ten humanoids in our country?
That there is not a TC bomb waiting to

get together?"
"I'll agree that those things are here, but perhaps for some reason

greater than just mid-winter bomb-madness."
"Such as?"
"It may be that the physical destruction resulting from the humanoids

getting together is not the worst thing that can happen to us.
What

about the moral and intellectual destruction that comes of their being

here at all?
With all due respect to Agent Breckenridge, what if

They _intended_ for us to find out about the humanoids; what if the

humanoids are never supposed to get together, but merely to remain

separate in order to give us something to worry about."
"Why?"
"Tell me this.
What measures have already been taken against the

humanoids?
I suppose that Security is going through the files of all

citizens who have ever been across the border or close enough to it

to make kidnapping possible.
I know, since Macalaster mentioned it

yesterday, that they are following up suspicious psychiatric cases.
What else?"
Jeffreys said, "Small X-ray devices are being installed in key places

in the large cities.
In the mass arenas, for instance--"



"Where ten humanoids might slip in among a hundred thousand spectators

of a football game or an air-polo match?"
"Exactly."
"And concert halls and churches?"
"We must start somewhere.
We can't do it all at once."
"Particularly when panic must be avoided?"
said Lynn.
"Isn't that so?
It wouldn't do to have the public realize that at any unpredictable

moment, some unpredictable city and its human contents would suddenly

cease to exist."
"I suppose that's obvious.
What are you driving at?"
Lynn said strenuously, "That a growing fraction of our national effort

will be diverted entirely into the nasty problem of what Amberley

called finding a very small needle in a very large haystack.
We'll

be chasing our tails madly, while They increase their research

lead to the point where we find we can no longer catch up; when we

must surrender without the chance even of snapping our fingers in

retaliation.
"Consider further that this news will leak out as more and more people

become involved in our counter-measures and more and more people begin

to guess what we're doing.
Then what?
The panic might do us more harm

than any one TC bomb."
The Presidential Assistant said, irritably, "In Heaven's name, man,

what do you suggest we do, then?"
"Nothing," said Lynn.
"Call their bluff.
Live as we have lived and

gamble that They won't dare break the stalemate for the sake of a

one-bomb headstart."
"Impossible!"
said Jeffreys.
"Completely impossible.
The welfare of all

of Us is very largely in my hands, and doing nothing is the one thing

I cannot do.
I agree with you, perhaps, that X-ray machines at sports

arenas are a kind of skin-deep measure that won't be effective, but it

has to be done so that people, in the aftermath, do not come to the

bitter conclusion that we tossed our country away for the sake of a

subtle line of reasoning that encouraged do-nothingism.
In fact, our

counter-gambit will be active indeed."
"In what way?"
Presidential Assistant Jeffreys looked at Breckenridge.
The young

Security officer, hitherto calmly silent, said, "It's no use talking

about a possible future break in the stalemate when the stalemate is

broken now.
It doesn't matter whether these humanoids explode or do

not.
Maybe they _are_ only a bait to divert us, as you say.
But the

fact remains that we are a quarter of a century behind in robotics, and

that may be fatal.
What other advances in robotics will there be to

surprise us if war does start?
The only answer is to divert our entire

force immediately, _now_, into a crash program of robotics research,

and the first problem is to find the humanoids.
Call it an exercise

in robotics, if you will, or call it the prevention of the death of

fifteen million men, women and children."
Lynn shook his head, helplessly, "You _can't_.
You'd be playing into

their hands.
They want us lured into the one blind alley while they're

free to advance in all other directions."
Jeffreys said, impatiently, "That's your guess.
Breckenridge has made

his suggestion through channels and the government has approved, and we

will begin with an all-Science conference."
"All-Science?"
Breckenridge said, "We have listed every important scientist of every

branch of natural science.
They'll all be at Cheyenne.
There will

be only one point on the agenda: How to advance robotics.
The major

specific sub-heading under that will be: How to develop a receiving

device for the electromagnetic fields of the cerebral cortex that will

be sufficiently delicate to distinguish between a protoplasmic human

brain and a positronic humanoid brain."
Jeffreys said, "We had hoped you would be willing to be in charge of

the conference."
"I was not consulted in this."
"Obviously time was short, sir.
Do you agree to be in charge?"
Lynn smiled briefly.
It was a matter of responsibility again.
The

responsibility must be clearly that of Lynn of Robotics.
He had the

feeling it would be Breckenridge who would really be in charge.
But

what could he do?
He said, "I agree."
*       *       *       *       *



Breckenridge and Lynn returned together to Cheyenne, where that evening

Laszlo listened with a sullen mistrust to Lynn's description of coming

events.
Laszlo said, "While you were gone, Chief, I've started putting

five experimental models of humanoid structure through the testing

procedures.
Our men are on a twelve-hour day, with three shifts

overlapping.
If we've got to arrange a conference, we're going to be

crowded and red-taped out of everything.
Work will come to a halt."
Breckenridge said, "That will be only temporary.
You will gain more

than you lose."
Laszlo scowled.
"A bunch of astrophysicists and geochemists around

won't help a damn toward robotics."
"Views from specialists of other fields may be helpful."
"Are you sure?
How do we know that there _is_ any way of detecting

brain waves or that, even if we can, there is a way of differentiating

human and humanoid by wave pattern.
Who set up the project, anyway?"
"I did," said Breckenridge.
"_You_ did?
Are you a robotics man?"
The young Security agent said, calmly, "I have studied robotics."
"That's not the same thing."
"I've had access to text-material dealing with Russian robotics--in

Russian.
Top-secret material well in advance of anything you have here."
Lynn said, ruefully, "He has us there, Laszlo."
"It was on the basis of that material," Breckenridge went on, "that

I suggested this particular line of investigation.
It is reasonably

certain that in copying off the electromagnetic pattern of a

specific human mind into a specific positronic brain, a perfectly

exact duplicate cannot be made.
For one thing, the most complicated

positronic brain small enough to fit into a human-sized skull is

hundreds of times less complex than the human brain.
It can't pick

up all the overtones, therefore, and there must be some way to take

advantage of that fact."
Laszlo looked impressed despite himself and Lynn smiled grimly.
It was

easy to resent Breckenridge and the coming intrusion of several hundred

scientists of non-robotics specialties, but the problem itself was an

intriguing one.
There was that consolation, at least.
*       *       *       *       *



It came to him quietly.
Lynn found he had nothing to do but sit in his office alone, with an

executive position that had grown merely titular.
Perhaps that helped.
It gave him time to think, to picture the creative scientists of half

the world converging on Cheyenne.
It was Breckenridge who, with cool efficiency, was handling the details

of preparation.
There had been a kind of confidence in the way he said,

"Let's get together and we'll lick Them."
Let's get together.
It came to Lynn so quietly that anyone watching Lynn at that moment

might have seen his eyes blink slowly twice--but surely nothing more.
He did what he had to do with a whirling detachment that kept him calm

when he felt that, by all rights, he ought to be going mad.
He sought out Breckenridge in the other's improvised quarters.
Breckenridge was alone and frowning.
"Is anything wrong, sir?"
Lynn said, wearily, "Everything's right, I think.
I've invoked martial

law."
"What!"
"As chief of a division I can do so if I am of the opinion the

situation warrants it.
Over my division, I can then be dictator.
Chalk

up one for the beauties of decentralization."
"You will rescind that order immediately."
Breckenridge took a step

forward.
"When Washington hears this, you will be ruined."
"I'm ruined anyway.
Do you think I don't realize that I've been set up

for the role of the greatest villain in American history: the man who

let Them break the stalemate.
I have nothing to lose--and perhaps a

great deal to gain."
He laughed a little wildly, "What a target the Division of Robotics

will be, eh, Breckenridge?
Only a few thousand men to be killed by

a TC bomb capable of wiping out three hundred square miles in one

micro-second.
But five hundred of those men would be our greatest

scientists.
We would be in the peculiar position of having to fight a

war with our brains shot out, or surrendering.
I think we'd surrender."
"But this is impossible.
Lynn, do you hear me?
Do you understand?
How

could the humanoids pass our security provisions?
How could they get

together?"
"But they _are_ getting together!
We're helping them to do so.
We're ordering them to do so.
Our scientists visit the other side,

Breckenridge.
They visit Them regularly.
You made a point of how

strange it was that no one in robotics did.
Well, ten of those

scientists are still there and in their place, ten humanoids are

converging on Cheyenne."
"That's a ridiculous guess."
"I think it's a good one, Breckenridge.
But it wouldn't work unless we

knew humanoids were in America so that we would call the conference in

the first place.
Quite a coincidence that you brought the news of the

humanoids _and_ suggested the conference _and_ suggested the agenda

_and_ are running the show and know exactly which scientists were

invited.
Did you make sure the right ten were included?"
"Dr.
Lynn!"
cried Breckenridge in outrage.
He poised to rush forward.
Lynn said, "Don't move.
I've got a blaster here.
We'll just wait for

the scientists to get here one by one.
One by one we'll X-ray them.
One

by one, we'll monitor them for radioactivity.
No two will get together

without being checked, and if all five hundred are clear, I'll give

you my blaster and surrender to you.
Only I think we'll find the ten

humanoids.
Sit down, Breckenridge."
They both sat.
Lynn said, "We wait.
When I'm tired, Laszlo will spell me.
We wait."
*       *       *       *       *



Professor Manuelo Jiminez of the Institute of Higher Studies of Buenos

Aires exploded while the stratospheric jet on which he traveled was

three miles above the Amazon Valley.
It was a simple chemical explosion

but it was enough to destroy the plane.
Dr. Herman Liebowitz of M. I. T. exploded in a monorail, killing twenty

people and injuring a hundred others.
In similar manner, Dr. Auguste Marin of L'Institut NuclÃ©onique of

Montreal and seven others died at various stages of their journey to

Cheyenne.
*       *       *       *       *



Laszlo hurtled in, pale-faced and stammering, with the first news

of it.
It had only been two hours that Lynn had sat there, facing

Breckenridge, blaster in hand.
Laszlo said, "I thought you were nuts, Chief, but you were right.
They _were_ humanoids.
They _had_ to be."
He turned to stare with

hate-filled eyes at Breckenridge.
"Only they were warned.
_He_ warned

them, and now there won't be one left intact.
Not one to study."
"God!"
cried Lynn and in a frenzy of haste thrust his blaster out

toward Breckenridge and fired.
The Security man's neck vanished; the

torso fell; the head dropped, thudded against the floor and rolled

crookedly.
Lynn moaned, "I didn't understand, I thought he was a traitor.
Nothing

more."
And Laszlo stood immobile, mouth open, for the moment incapable of

speech.
Lynn said, wildly.
"Sure, he warned them.
But how could he do so while

sitting in that chair unless he were equipped with built-in radio

transmission?
Don't you see it?
Breckenridge had been in Moscow.
The

real Breckenridge is still there.
Oh my God, there were _eleven_ of

them."
Laszlo managed a hoarse squeak.
"Why didn't _he_ explode?"
"He was hanging on, I suppose, to make sure the others had received his

message and were safely destroyed.
Lord, Lord, when you brought the

news and I realized the truth, I couldn't shoot fast enough.
God knows

by how few seconds I may have beaten him to it."
Laszlo said, shakily, "At least, we'll have one to study."
He bent

and put his fingers on the sticky fluid trickling out of the mangled

remains at the neck end of the headless body.
Not blood, but high-grade machine oil.
[Illustration: “My God ... watch out!
It’s nitroglycerine!”]





                      The Magnificent Possession



                            By Isaac Asimov





        Walter Sills labored for years as an unknown laboratory

        worker--but at fifty he makes his great discovery!
Fame,

        riches are to be his fate--until interference looms up

        in the form of a few unreliable characters--and Nature

        herself!
Walter Sills reflected now, as he had reflected often before, that life

was hard and joyless.
He surveyed his dingy chemical laboratory and

grinned cynically--working in a dirty hole of a place, living on

occasional ore analyses that barely paid for absolutely indispensable

equipment, while others, not half his worth perhaps, were working for

big industrial concerns and taking life easy.
He looked out the window at the Hudson River, ruddied in the flame of

the dying sun, and wondered moodily whether these last experiments

would finally bring him the fame and success he was after, or if they

were merely some more false alarms.
The unlocked door creaked open a crack and the cheerful face of Eugene

Taylor burst into view.
Sills waved and Taylor’s body followed his head

and entered the laboratory.
“Hello, old soak,” came the loud and carefree hail.
“How go things?”



Sills shook his head at the other’s exuberance.
“I wish I had your

foolish outlook on life, Gene.
For your information, things are bad.
I

need money, and the more I need it, the less I have.”



“Well, I haven’t any money either, have I?” demanded Taylor.
“But why

worry about it?
You’re fifty, and worry hasn’t got you anything except

a bald head.
I’m thirty, and I want to keep my beautiful brown hair.”



The chemist grinned.
“I’ll get my money, yet, Gene.
Just leave it to

me.”



“Your new ideas shaping out well?”



“Are they?
I haven’t told you much about it, have I?
Well, come here

and I’ll show you what progress I’ve made.”



Taylor followed Sills to a small table, on which stood a rack of

test-tubes, in one of which was about half an inch of a shiny metallic

substance.
“Sodium-mercury mixture, or sodium amalgam, as it is called,” explained

Sills, pointing to it.
He took a bottle labeled “Ammonium Chloride Sol.” from the shelf and

poured a little into the tube.
Immediately the sodium amalgam began

changing into a loosely-packed, spongy substance.
“That,” observed Sills, “is ammonium amalgam.
The ammonium radical

(NH₄) acts as a metal here and combines with mercury.” He waited for

the action to go to completion and then poured off the supernatant

liquid.
“Ammonium amalgam isn’t very stable,” he informed Taylor, “so I’ll have

to work fast.” He grasped a flask of straw-colored, pleasant-smelling

liquid and filled the test-tube with it.
Upon shaking, the

loosely-packed ammonium amalgam vanished and in its stead a small drop

of metallic liquid rolled about the bottom.
Taylor gazed at the test-tube, open-mouthed.
“What happened?”



“This liquid is a complex derivative of Hydrazine which I’ve discovered

and named Ammonaline.
I haven’t worked out its formula yet, but that

doesn’t matter.
The point about it is that it has the property of

dissolving the ammonium out of the amalgam.
Those few drops at the

bottom are pure mercury; the ammonium is in solution.”



Taylor remained unresponsive and Sills waxed enthusiastic.
“Don’t you

see the implications?
I’ve gone half way towards isolating pure

ammonium, a thing which has never been done before!
Once accomplished

it means fame, success, the Nobel Prize, and who knows what else.”



“Wow!” Taylor’s gaze became more respectful.
“That yellow stuff doesn’t

look so important to me.” He snatched for it, but Sills withheld it.
“I haven’t finished by any means, Gene.
I’ve got to get it in its free

metallic state, and I can’t do that so far.
Every time I try to

evaporate the Ammonaline, the ammonium breaks down to everlasting

ammonia and hydrogen....
But I’ll get it--I’ll get it!”



                 *       *       *       *       *



Two weeks later, the epilogue to the previous scene was enacted.
Taylor

received a hurried and emphatic call from his chemist friend and

appeared at the laboratory in a flurry of anticipation.
“You’ve got it?”



“I’ve got it--and it’s bigger than I thought!
There’s millions in it,

really,” Sills’ eyes shone with rapture.
“I’ve been working from the wrong angle up to now,” he explained.
“Heating the solvent always broke down the dissolved ammonium, so I

separated it out by freezing.
It works the same way as brine, which,

when frozen slowly, freezes into fresh ice, the salt crystallizing out.
Luckily, the Ammonaline freezes at 18 degrees Centigrade and doesn’t

require much cooling.”



He pointed dramatically to a small beaker, inside a glass-walled case.
The beaker contained pale, straw-colored, needle-like crystals and

covering the top of this, a thin layer of a dullish, yellow substance.
“Why the case?” asked Taylor.
“I’ve got it filled with argon to keep the ammonium (which is the

yellow substance on top of the Ammonaline) pure.
It is so active that

it will react with anything else but a helium-type gas.”



Taylor marveled and pounded his complacently-smiling friend on the

back.
“Wait, Gene, the best is yet to come.”



Taylor was led to the other end of the room and Sills’ trembling finger

pointed out another airtight case containing a lump of metal of a

gleaming yellow that sparkled and glistened.
“That, my friend, is ammonium oxide (NH4₂O), formed by passing

_absolutely dry_ air over free ammonium metal.
It is perfectly inert

(the sealed case contains quite a bit of chlorine, for instance, and

yet there is no reaction).
It can be made as cheaply as aluminum, if

not more so, and yet it looks more like gold than gold does itself.
Do

you see the possibilities?”



“Do I?” exploded Taylor.
“It will sweep the country.
You can have

ammonium jewelry, and ammonium-plated table-ware, and a million other

things.
Then again, who knows how many countless industrial

applications it may have?
You’re rich, Walt--you’re rich!”



“_We’re_ rich,” corrected Sills gently.
He moved towards the telephone.
“The newspapers are going to hear of this.
I’m going to begin to cash

in on fame right now.”



Taylor frowned, “Maybe you’d better keep it a secret, Walt.”



“Oh, I’m not breathing a hint as to the process.
I’ll just give them

the general idea.
Besides, we’re safe; the patent application is in

Washington right now.”



But Sills was wrong!
The article in the paper ushered in a very, very

hectic two days for the two of them.
*       *       *       *       *



J. Throgmorton Bankhead is what is commonly known as a “captain of

   industry.” As head of the Acme Chromium and Silver Plating

   Corporation, he no doubt deserved the title; but to his patient and

   long-suffering wife, he was merely a dyspeptic and grouchy husband,

   especially at the breakfast table ... and he was at the breakfast

   table now.
Rustling his morning paper angrily, he sputtered between bites of

buttered toast, “This man is ruining the country.” He pointed aghast at

big, black headlines.
“I said before and I’ll say again that the man is

as crazy as a bedbug.
He won’t be satisfied....”



“Joseph, please,” pleaded his wife, “you’re getting purple in the face.
Remember your high blood pressure.
You know the doctor told you to stop

reading the news from Washington if it annoys you so.
Now, listen dear,

about the cook.
She’s....”



“The doctor’s a damn fool, and so are you,” shouted J. Throgmorton

Bankhead.
“I’ll read all the news I please and get purple in the face

too, if I want to.”



He raised the cup of coffee to his mouth and took a critical sip.
While

he did so, his eyes fell upon a more insignificant headline towards the

bottom of the page: “Savant Discovers Gold Substitute.”



                 *       *       *       *       *



The coffee cup remained in the air while he scanned the article

quickly.
“This new metal,” it ran in part, “is claimed by its

discoverer to be far superior to chromium, nickel, or silver for

plating purposes, besides being ideal material for cheap and beautiful

jewelry.
‘The twenty-dollar-a-week clerk,’ said Professor Sills, ‘will

eat off ammonium plate more impressive in appearance than the gold

plate of the Indian Nabob.’ There is no....”



But J. Throgmorton Bankhead had stopped reading.
Visions of a ruined

Acme Chromium and Silver Plating Corporation danced before his eyes;

and as they danced, the cup of coffee dropped from his hand, and

splashed hot liquid over his trousers.
His wife rose to her feet in alarm, “What is it, Joseph; what is it?”



“Nothing,” Bankhead shouted.
“Nothing.
For God’s sake, go away, will

you?”



He strode angrily out of the room, leaving his wife to search the paper

in vain for anything that could have disturbed him.
“Bob’s Tavern” on Fifteenth Street is usually pretty well filled at all

times, but on the morning we are speaking of, it was empty except for

four or five rather poorly-dressed men, who clustered about the portly

and dignified form of Peter Q. Hornswoggle, eminent ex-Congressman.
Peter Q. Hornswoggle was, as usual, speaking fluently.
His subject,

again, as usual, concerned the life of a Congressman.
“I remember a case in point,” he was saying, “when that same argument

was brought up in the house, and which I answered as follows: ‘The

eminent gentleman from Nevada in his statements overlooks one very

important aspect of the problem.
He does not realize that it is to the

interest of the entire nation that the apple-parers of this country be

attended to promptly; for, gentlemen, on the welfare of the

apple-parers depends the future of the entire fruit industry and on the

fruit-industry is based the entire economy of this great and glorious

nation, the United States of America.”



Hornswoggle paused, swallowed half a pint of beer at once, and then

smiled in triumph, “I have no hesitation in saying, gentlemen, that at

that statement, the entire House burst into wild and tumultuous

applause.”



One of the assembled listeners shook his head slowly and marveled.
“It

must be great to be able to spiel like that, Senator.
You musta been a

sensation.”



“Yeah,” agreed the bartender, “it’s a dirty shame you were beat last

election.”



The ex-Congressman winced and in a very dignified tone began, “I have

been reliably informed that the use of bribery in that campaign reached

unprecedented prop....” His voice died away suddenly as he caught sight

of a certain article in the newspaper of one of his listeners.
He

snatched at it and read it through in silence and thereupon his eyes

gleamed with a sudden idea.
“My friends,” he said turning to them again, “I find I must leave you.
There is pressing work that must be done immediately at City Hall.” He

leant over to whisper to the barkeeper, “You haven’t got twenty-five

cents, have you?
I find I left my wallet in the Mayor’s office by

mistake.
I will surely repay you tomorrow.”



Clutching the quarter, reluctantly given, Peter Q. Hornswoggle left.
*       *       *       *       *



In a small and dimly lit room somewhere in the lower reaches of First

Avenue, Michael Maguire, known to the police by the far more euphonious

name of Mike the Slug, cleaned his trusty revolver and hummed a

tuneless song.
The door opened a crack and Mike looked up.
“That you, Slappy?”



“Yeh,” a short, wizened person sidled in, “I brung ya de evenin’ sheet.
De cops are still tinkin’ Bragoni pulled de job.”



“Yeh?
That’s good.” He bent unconcernedly over the revolver.
“Anything

else doing?”



“Naw!
Some dippy dame killed herself, but dat’s all.”



He tossed the newspaper to Mike and left.
Mike leaned back and flipped

the pages in a bored manner.
A headline attracted his eye and he read the short article that

followed.
Having finished, he threw aside the paper, lit a cigarette,

and did some heavy thinking.
Then he opened the door.
“Hey, Slappy, c’mere.
There’s a job that’s got to be done.”





A NIGHT OF TROUBLE



Walter Sills was happy, deliriously so.
He walked about his laboratory

king of all he surveyed, strutting like a peacock, basking in his

new-found glory.
Eugene Taylor sat and watched him, scarcely less happy

himself.
“How does it feel to be famous?” Taylor wanted to know.
“Like a million dollars; and that’s what I’m going to sell the secret

of ammonium metal for.
It’s the fat of the land for me from now on.”



“You leave the practical details to me, Walt.
I’m getting in touch with

Staples of Eagle Steel today.
You’ll get a decent price from him.”



The bell rang, and Sills jumped.
He ran to open the door.
“Is this the home of Walter Sills?” The large, scowling visitor gazed

about him superciliously.
“Yes, I’m Sills.
Do you wish to see me?”



“Yes.
My name is J. Throgmorton Bankhead and I represent the Acme

Chromium and Silver Plating Corporation.
I would like to have a

moment’s discussion with you.”



“Come right in.
Come right in!
This is Eugene Taylor, my associate.
You

may speak freely before him.”



“Very well,” Bankhead seated himself heavily.
“I suppose you surmise

the reason for my visit.”



“I take it that you have read of the new ammonium metal in the papers.”



“That’s right.
I have come to see whether there is any truth in the

story and to buy your process if there is.”



“You can see for yourself, sir,” Sills led the magnate to where the

argon-filled container of the few grams of pure ammonium were.
“That is

the metal.
Over here to the right, I’ve got the oxide, an oxide which

is more metallic than the metal itself, strangely enough.
It is the

oxide that is what the papers call ‘substitute gold’.”



Bankhead’s face showed not an atom of the sinking feeling within him as

he viewed the oxide with dismay.
“Take it out in the open,” he said,

“and let’s see it.”



Sills shook his head.
“I can’t, Mr. Bankhead.
Those are the first

samples of ammonium and ammonium oxide that ever existed.
They’re

museum pieces.
I can easily make more for you, if you wish.”



“You’ll have to, if you expect me to sink my money in it.
You satisfy

me and I’ll be willing to buy your patent for as much as--oh, say a

thousand dollars.”



“A thousand dollars!” exclaimed Sills and Taylor together.
“A very fair price, gentlemen.”



“A million would be more like it,” shouted Taylor in an outraged tone.
“This discovery is a goldmine.”



                 *       *       *       *       *



“A million, indeed!
You are dreaming, gentlemen.
The fact of the matter

is that my company has been on the track of ammonium for years now, and

we are just at the point of solving the problem.
Unfortunately you beat

us by a week or so, and so I wish to buy up your patent in order to

save my company a great deal of annoyance.
You realize, of course, that

if you refuse my price, I could just go ahead and manufacture the

metal, using my own process.”



“We’ll sue if you do,” said Taylor.
“Have you got the money for a long, protracted--and

expensive--lawsuit?” Bankhead smiled nastily.
“I have, you know.
To

prove, however, that I am not unreasonable, I will make the price two

thousand.”



“You’ve heard our price,” answered Taylor stonily, “and we have nothing

further to say.”



“All right, gentlemen,” Bankhead walked towards the door, “think it

over.
You’ll see it my way, I’m sure.”



He opened the door and revealed the symmetrical form of Peter Q.

Hornswoggle bent in rapt concentration at the keyhole.
Bankhead sneered

audibly and the ex-Congressman jumped to his feet in consternation,

bowing rapidly two or three times, for want of anything better to do.
The financier passed by disdainfully and Hornswoggle entered, slammed

the door behind him, and faced the two bewildered friends.
“That man, my dear sirs, is a malefactor of great wealth, an economic

royalist.
He is the type of predatory interest that is the ruination of

this country.
You did quite right in refusing his offer.” He placed his

hand on his ample chest and smiled at them benignantly.
“Who the devil are you?” rasped Taylor, suddenly recovering from his

initial surprise.
“I?” Hornswoggle was taken aback.
“Why--er--I am Peter Quintus

Hornswoggle.
Surely, you know me.
I was in the House of Representatives

last year.”



“Never heard of you.
What do you want?”



“Why, bless me!
I read in the papers of your wonderful discovery and

have come to place my services at your feet.”



“What services?”



“Well, after all, you two are not men of the world.
With your new

invention, you are prey for every self-seeking unscrupulous person that

comes along--like Bankhead, for instance.
Now, a practical man of

affairs, such as I, one with experience of the world, would be of

inestimable use to you.
I could handle your affairs, attend to details,

see that--”



“All for nothing, of course, eh?” Taylor asked, sardonically.
Hornswoggle coughed convulsively.
“Well, naturally, I thought that a

small interest in your discovery might fittingly be assigned to me.”



Sills, who had remained silent during all this, rose to his feet

suddenly.
“Get out of here!
Did you hear me?
Get out, before I call the

police.”



“Now, Professor Sills, pray don’t get excited,” Hornswoggle retreated

uneasily towards the door which Taylor held open for him.
He passed out

still protesting, and swore softly to himself when the door slammed in

his face.
Sills sank wearily into the nearest chair.
“What are we to do, Gene?
He

offers only two thousand.
A week ago that would have been beyond

anything I could have hoped for, but now--”



“Forget it.
The fellow was only bluffing.
Listen, I’m going right now

to call on Staples.
We’ll sell to him for what we can get (it ought to

be plenty) and then if there’s any trouble with Bankhead--well, that’s

Staples’ worry.” He patted the other on the shoulder.
“Our troubles are

practically over.”



Unfortunately, however, Taylor was wrong; their troubles were only

beginning.
*       *       *       *       *



Across the street, a furtive figure, with beady eyes peering from

upturned coat collar, surveyed the house carefully.
A curious policeman

might have identified him as “Slappy” Egan, if he had bothered to look,

but no one did and “Slappy” remained unmolested.
“Cripes,” he muttered to himself, “dis is gonna be a cinch.
De whole

woiks on the bottom floor, back window can be jimmied wid a toot’pick,

no alarms, no nuttin.” He chuckled and walked away.
Nor was “Slappy” alone with his ideas.
Peter Q. Hornswoggle, as he

walked away, found strange thoughts wandering through his massive

cranium--thoughts which involved a certain amount of unorthodox action.
And J. Throgmorton Bankhead was likewise active.
Belonging to that

virile class known as “go-getters” and being not at all scrupulous as

to how he “go-got,” and certainly not intending to pay a million

dollars for the secret of ammonium, he found it necessary to call on a

certain one of his acquaintances.
This acquaintance, while a very useful one, was a bit unsavory, and

Bankhead found it advisable to be very careful and cautious while

visiting him.
However, the conversation that ensued ended in a pleasing

manner for both of them.
*       *       *       *       *



Walter Sills snapped out of an uneasy sleep with startled suddenness.
He listened anxiously for a while and then leaned over and nudged

Taylor.
He was rewarded by a few incoherent snuffles.
“Gene, Gene, wake up!
Come on, get up!”



“Eh?
What is it?
What are you bothering--”



“Shut up!
Listen, do you hear it?”



“I don’t hear anything.
Leave me alone, will you?”



Sills put his finger on his lips, and the other quieted.
There was a

distinct shuffling noise down below, in the laboratory.
Taylor’s eyes widened and sleep left them entirely.
“Burglars!” he

whispered.
The two crept out of bed, donned bathrobe and slippers, and tiptoed to

the door.
Taylor had a revolver and took the lead in descending the

stairs.
They had traversed perhaps half the flight, when there was a sudden,

surprised shout from below, followed by a series of loud, threshing

noises.
This continued for a few moments and then there was a loud

crash of glassware.
“My ammonium!” cried Sills in a stricken voice and rushed headlong down

the stairs, evading Taylor’s clutching arms.
The chemist burst into the laboratory, followed closely by his cursing

associate, and clicked the lights on.
Two struggling figures blinked

owlishly in the sudden illumination, and separated.
Taylor’s gun covered them.
“Well, isn’t this nice,” he said.
One of the two lurched to his feet from amid a tangle of broken beakers

and flasks, and, nursing a cut on his wrist, bent his portly body in a

still dignified bow.
It was Peter Q. Hornswoggle.
“No doubt,” he said, eyeing the unwavering firearm nervously, “the

circumstances seem suspicious, but I can explain very easily.
You see,

in spite of the very rough treatment I received after having made my

reasonable proposal, I still felt a great deal of kindly interest in

you two.
“Therefore, being a man of the world, and knowing the iniquities of

mankind, I just decided to keep an eye on your house tonight, for I saw

you had neglected to take precautions against house-breakers.
Judge my

surprise to see this dastardly creature,” he pointed to the flat-nosed,

plug-ugly, who still remained on the floor in a daze, “creeping in at

the back window.
“Immediately, I risked life and limb in following the criminal,

attempting desperately to save your great discovery.
I really feel I

deserve great credit for what I have done.
I’m sure you will feel that

I am a valuable person to deal with and reconsider your answers to my

earlier proposals.”



Taylor listened to all this with a cynical smile.
“You can certainly

lie fluently, can’t you, P.
Q.?”



He would have continued at greater length and with greater forcefulness

had not the other burglar suddenly raised his voice in loud protest.
“Cripes, boss, dis fat slob here is only tryin’ to get me in bad.
I’m

just followin’ orders, boss.
A fellow hired me to come in here and

rifle the safe and I’m just oinin’ a bit o’ honest money.
Just plain

safe-crackin’, boss, I ain’t out to hurt no one.
“Den, just as I was gettin’ down to de job--warmin’ up, so to say--in

crawls dis little guy wid a chisel and blowtorch and makes for de safe.
Well, natur’lly, I don’t like no competition, so I lays for him and

then--”



But Hornswoggle had drawn himself up in icy hauteur.
“It remains to be

seen whether the word of a gangster is to be taken before the word of

one, who, I may truthfully say, was, in his time, one of the most

eminent members of the great--”



“Quiet, both of you,” shouted Taylor, waving the gun threateningly.
“I’m calling the police and you can annoy _them_ with your stories.
Say, Walt, is everything all right?”



“I think so!” Sills returned from his inspection of the laboratory.
“They only knocked over empty glassware.
Everything else is unharmed.”



“That’s good,” Taylor began, and then choked in dismay.
From the hallway, a cool individual, hat drawn well over his eyes,

entered.
A revolver, expertly handled, changed the situation

considerably.
“O.
K.,” he grunted at Taylor, “drop the gat!” The other’s weapon

slipped from reluctant fingers and hit the floor with a clank.
The new menace surveyed the four others with a sardonic glance.
“Well!
So there were two others trying to beat me to it.
This seems to be a

very popular place.”



                 *       *       *       *       *



Sills and Taylor stared stupidly, while Hornswoggle’s teeth chattered

energetically.
The first mobster moved back uneasily, muttering as he

did so, “For Pete’s sake, it’s Mike the Slug.”



“Yeah,” Mike rasped, “Mike the Slug.
There’s lots of guys who know me

and who know I ain’t afraid to pull the trigger anytime I feel like.
Come on, Baldy, hand over the works.
You know--the stuff about your

fake gold.
Come on, before I count five.”



Sills moved slowly toward the old safe in the corner.
Mike stepped back

carelessly to give him room, and in so doing, his coat sleeve brushed

against a shelf.
A small vial of sodium sulphate solution tottered and

fell.
With sudden inspiration, Sills yelled, “My God, watch out!
It’s

nitroglycerine!”



The vial hit the floor with the smashing tinkle of broken glass, and

involuntarily, Mike yelled and jumped in wild dismay.
And as he did so,

Taylor crashed into him with a beautiful flying tackle.
At the same

time, Sills lunged for Taylor’s fallen weapon to cover the other two.
For this, however, there was no longer need.
At the very beginning of

the confusion, both had faded hurriedly into the night from whence they

came.
Taylor and Mike the Slug rolled round and round the laboratory floor,

locked in desperate struggle while Sills hopped over and about them,

praying for a moment of comparative quiet that he might bring the

revolver into sharp and sudden contact with the gangster’s skull.
But no such moment came.
Suddenly Mike lunged, caught Taylor stunningly

under the chin, and jerked free.
Sills yelled in consternation and

pulled the trigger at the fleeing figure.
The shot was wild and Mike

escaped unharmed.
Sills made no attempt to follow.
A sluicing stream of cold water brought Taylor back to his senses.
He

shook his head dazedly as he surveyed the surrounding shambles.
“Whew!” he said, “What a night!”



Sills groaned, “What are we going to do now, Gene?
Our very lives are

in danger.
I never thought of the possibility of thieves, or I would

never have told of the discovery to the newspapers.”



“Oh well, the harm’s done; no use weeping over it.
Now listen, the

first thing we have to do now is to get back to sleep.
They won’t

bother us again tonight.
Tomorrow, you’ll go to the bank and put the

papers outlining the details of the process in the vault (which you

should have done long ago).
Staples will be here at 3 p.m.; we’ll close

the deal, and then, at last, we’ll live happily ever after.”



The chemist shook his head dolefully.
“Ammonium has certainly proved to

be very upsetting so far.
I almost wish I had never heard of it.
I’d

almost rather be back doing ore analysis.”





AN UNEXPECTED SURPRISE!
As Walter Sills rattled cross-town towards his bank, he found no reason

to change his wish.
Even the comforting and homely jiggling of his

ancient and battered automobile failed to cheer him.
From a life

characterized by peaceful monotony, he had entered a period of bedlam,

and he was not at all satisfied with the change.
“Riches, like poverty, has its own peculiar problems,” he remarked

sententiously to himself as he braked the car before the two-story,

marble edifice that was the bank.
He stepped out carefully, stretched

his cramped legs, and headed for the revolving door.
He didn’t get there right away, though.
Two husky specimens of the

human race stepped up, one at each side, and Sills felt a very hard

object pressing with painful intensity against his ribs.
He opened his

mouth involuntarily, and was rewarded by an icy voice in his ears,

“Quiet, Baldy, or you’ll get what you deserve for the damn trick you

pulled on me last night.”



Sills shivered and subsided.
He recognized Mike the Slug’s voice very

easily.
“Where’s the details?” asked Mike, “and make it quick.”



“Inside jacket pocket,” croaked Sills tremulously.
Mike’s companion passed his hand dexterously into the indicated pocket

and flicked out three or four folded sheets of foolscap.
“Dat it, Mike?”



A hasty appraisal and a nod, “Yeh, we got it.
All right.
Baldy, on your

way!” A sudden shove and the two gangsters jumped into their car and

drove away rapidly, while the chemist sprawled on the sidewalk.
Kindly

hands raised him up.
“It’s all right,” he managed to gasp.
“I just tripped, that’s all.
I’m

not hurt.” He found himself alone again, passed into the bank, and

dropped into the nearest bench, in near-collapse.
There was no doubt

about it; the new life was not for him.
But he should have been prepared for it.
Taylor had foreseen a

possibility of this sort of thing happening.
He, himself, had thought a

car had been trailing him.
Yet, in his surprise and fright, he had

almost ruined everything.
He shrugged his thin shoulders and, taking off his hat, abstracted a

few folded sheets of paper from the sweatband.
It was the work of five

minutes to deposit them in a vault, and see the immensely strong steel

door swing shut.
He felt relieved.
“I wonder what they’ll do,” he muttered to himself on the way home,

“when they try to follow the instructions on the paper they _did_ get.”

He pursed his lips and shook his head.
“If they do, there’s going to be

one heck of an explosion.”



Sills arrived home to find three policemen pacing leisurely up and down

the sidewalk in front of the house.
“Police guard,” explained Taylor shortly, “so that we have no more

trouble like last night.”



The chemist related the events at the bank and Taylor nodded grimly.
“Well, it’s checkmate for them now.
Staples will be here in two hours

and until then, the police will take care of things.
Afterwards,” he

shrugged, “it will be Staples’ affair.”



“Listen, Gene,” the chemist put in suddenly, “I’m worried about the

ammonium.
I haven’t tested its plating abilities and those are the most

important things, you know.
What if Staples comes, and we find that all

we have is pigeon milk.”



“Hmm,” Taylor stroked his chin, “you’re right there.
But I’ll tell you

what we can do.
Before Staples comes, let’s plate something--a spoon,

suppose--for our own satisfaction.”



“It’s really very annoying,” Sills complained fretfully.
“If it weren’t

for these troublesome hooligans, we wouldn’t have to proceed in this

slipshod and unscientific manner.”



“Well, let’s eat dinner first.”



                 *       *       *       *       *



After the mid-day meal, they began.
The apparatus was set up in

feverish haste.
In a cubic vat, a foot each way, a saturated solution

of Ammonaline was poured.
An old, battered spoon was the cathode and a

mass of ammonium amalgam (separated from the rest of the solution by a

perforated glass partition) was the anode.
Three batteries in series

provided the current.
Sills explained animatedly, “It works on the same principle as ordinary

copper plating.
The ammonium ion, once the electric current is run

through, is attracted to the cathode, which is the spoon.
Ordinarily it

would break up, being unstable, but this is not the case when it is

dissolved in Ammonaline.
This Ammonaline is itself very slightly

ionized and oxygen is given off at the anode.
“This much I know from theory.
Let us see what happens in practice.”



He closed the key while Taylor watched with breathless interest.
For a

moment, no effect was visible.
Taylor looked disappointed.
Then Sills grasped his sleeve.
“See!” he hissed.
“Watch the anode!”



Sure enough, bubbles of gas were slowly forming upon the spongy

ammonium amalgam.
They shifted their attention to the spoon.
Gradually, they noticed a change.
The metallic appearance became

dulled, the silver color slowly losing its whiteness.
A layer of

distinct, if dull, yellow was being built up.
For fifteen minutes, the

current ran and then Sills broke the circuit with a contented sigh.
“It plates perfectly,” he said.
“Good!
Take it out!
Let’s see it!”



“What?” Sills was aghast.
“Take it out!
Why, that’s pure ammonium.
If I

were to expose it to ordinary air, the water vapor would dissolve it to

NH₄OH in no time.
We can’t do that.”



He dragged a rather bulky piece of apparatus to the table.
“This,” he

said, “is a compressed-air container.
I run it through calcium chloride

dryers and then bubble the perfectly dry oxygen (safely diluted with

four times its own volume of nitrogen) directly into the solvent.”



He introduced the nozzle into the solution just beneath the spoon and

turned on a slow stream of air.
It worked like magic.
With almost

lightning speed, the yellow coating began to glitter and gleam, to

shine with almost ethereal beauty.
The two men watched it with beating heart and panting breath.
Sills

shut the air off, and for a while they watched the wonderful spoon and

said nothing.
Then Taylor whispered hoarsely, “Take it out.
Let me feel it!
My

God!--it’s beautiful!”



With reverent awe, Sills approached the spoon, grasped it with forceps,

and withdrew it from the surrounding liquid.
What followed immediately after that can never be fully described.
Later on, when excited newspaper reporters pressed them unmercifully,

neither Taylor nor Sills had the least recollection of the happenings

of the next few minutes.
What happened was that the moment the ammonium-plated spoon was exposed

to open air, the most horrible odor ever conceived assailed their

nostrils!--an odor that cannot be described, a terrible broth of Hell

that plunged the room into sheer, horrible nightmare.
With one strangled gasp, Sills dropped the spoon.
Both were coughing

and retching, tearing wildly at their throats and mouths, yelling,

weeping, sneezing!
Taylor pounced upon the spoon and looked about wildly.
The odor grew

steadily more powerful and their wild exertions to escape it had

already succeeded in wrecking the laboratory and had upset the vat of

Ammonaline.
There was only one thing to do, and Sills did it.
The spoon

went flying out the open window into the middle of Twelfth Avenue.
It

hit the sidewalk right at the feet of one of the policemen, but Taylor

didn’t care.
“Take off your clothes.
We’ll have to burn them,” Sills was gasping.
“Then spray something over the laboratory--anything with a strong

smell.
Burn sulphur.
Get some liquid bromine.”



                 *       *       *       *       *



Both were tearing at their clothes in distraction when they realized

that someone had walked in through the unlocked door.
The bell had

rung, but neither had heard it.
It was Staples, six-foot, lion-maned

Steel King.
One step into the hall ruined his dignity utterly.
He collapsed in one

tearing sob and Twelfth Avenue was treated to the spectacle of an

elderly, richly-dressed gentleman tearing uptown as fast as his feet

would carry him, shedding as much of his clothes as he dared while

doing so.
The spoon continued its deadly work.
The three policemen had long since

retired in abject rout, and now to the numbed and tortured senses of

the two innocent and suffering causes of the entire mess came a roaring

and confused shouting from the street.
Men and women were pouring out of the neighboring houses, horses were

bolting.
Fire engines clanged down the street, only to be abandoned by

their riders.
Squadrons of police came--and left.
Sills and Taylor finally gave up, and clad only in trousers, ran

pell-mell for the Hudson.
They did not stop until they found themselves

neck-deep in water, with blessed, pure air above them.
Taylor turned bewildered eyes to Sills.
“But how could it emit that

horrible odor?
You said it was stable and stable solids have no odors.
It takes vapor for that, doesn’t it?”



“Have you ever smelled musk?” groaned Sills.
“It will give off an aroma

for an indefinite period without losing any appreciable weight.
We’ve

come up against something like that.”



The two ruminated in silence for a while, wincing whenever the wind

brought a vagrant waft of ammonium vapor to them, and then Taylor said

in a low voice, “When they finally trace the trouble to the spoon, and

find out who made it, I’m afraid we’ll be sued--or maybe thrown in

jail.”



Sills’ face lengthened.
“I wish I’d never seen the damned stuff!
It’s

brought nothing but trouble.” His tortured spirit gave way and he

sobbed loudly.
Taylor patted him on the back mournfully.
“It’s not as bad as all that,

of course.
The discovery will make you famous and you’ll be able to

demand your own price, working at any industrial lab in the country.
Then, too, you’re a cinch to win the Nobel Prize.”



“That’s right,” Sills smiled again, “and I may find a way to counteract

the odor, too.
I hope so.”



“I hope so, too,” said Taylor feelingly.
“Let’s go back.
I think

they’ve managed to remove the spoon by now.”



[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the July 1940 issue of

_Future Fiction_ magazine.]
LET'S GET TOGETHER



                            By ISAAC ASIMOV



                         Illustrated by ENGLE



           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from

                       Infinity, February 1957.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that

         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]
A kind of peace had endured for a century and people had forgotten what

anything else was like.
They would scarcely have known how to react had

they discovered that a kind of war had finally come.
Certainly, Elias Lynn, Chief of the Bureau of Robotics, wasn't sure

how he ought to react when _he_ finally found out.
The Bureau of

Robotics was headquartered in Cheyenne, in line with the century-old

trend toward decentralization, and Lynn stared dubiously at the young

Security officer from Washington who had brought the news.
Elias Lynn was a large man, almost charmingly homely, with pale blue

eyes that bulged a bit.
Men weren't usually comfortable under the stare

of those eyes, but the Security officer remained calm.
Lynn decided that his first reaction ought to be incredulity.
Hell, it

_was_ incredulity!
He just didn't believe it!
He eased himself back in his chair and said, "How certain is the

information?"
The Security officer, who had introduced himself as Ralph G.

Breckenridge and had presented credentials to match, had the softness

of youth about him; full lips, plump cheeks that flushed easily,

and guileless eyes.
His clothing was out of line with Cheyenne but

it suited a universally air-conditioned Washington, where Security,

despite everything, was still centered.
Breckenridge flushed and said, "There's no doubt about it."
"You people know all about Them, I suppose," said Lynn and was unable

to keep a trace of sarcasm out of his tone.
He was not particularly

aware of his use of a slightly-stressed pronoun in his reference to the

enemy, the equivalent of capitalization in print.
It was a cultural

habit of this generation and the one preceding.
No one said the "East,"

or the "Reds" or the "Soviets" or the "Russians" any more.
That would

have been too confusing, since some of Them weren't of the East,

weren't Reds, Soviets, and especially not Russians.
It was much simpler

to say We and They, and much more precise.
Travelers had frequently reported that They did the same in reverse.
Over there, They were "We" (in the appropriate language) and We were

"They."
Scarcely anyone gave thought to such things any more.
It was all quite

comfortable and casual.
There was no hatred, even.
At the beginning,

it had been called a Cold War.
Now it was only a game, almost a

good-natured game, with unspoken rules and a kind of decency about it.
Lynn said, abruptly, "Why should They want to disturb the situation?"
He rose and stood staring at a wall-map of the world, split into two

regions with faint edgings of color.
An irregular portion on the left

of the map was edged in a mild green.
A smaller, but just as irregular,

portion on the right of the map was bordered in a washed-out pink.
We

and They.
The map hadn't changed much in a century.
The loss of Formosa and

the gain of East Germany some eighty years before had been the last

territorial switch of importance.
There had been another change, though, that was significant enough and

that was in the colors.
Two generations before, Their territory had

been a brooding, bloody red, Ours a pure and undefiled white.
Now there

was a neutrality about the colors.
Lynn had seen Their maps and it was

the same on Their side.
"They wouldn't do it," he said.
"They are doing it," said Breckenridge, "and you had better accustom

yourself to the fact.
Of course, sir, I realize that it isn't pleasant

to think that they may be that far ahead of us in robotics."
His eyes remained as guileless as ever, but the hidden knife-edges of

the words plunged deep, and Lynn quivered at the impact.
Of course, that would account for why the Chief of Robotics learned of

this so late and through a Security officer at that.
He had lost caste

in the eyes of the Government; if Robotics had really failed in the

struggle, Lynn could expect no political mercy.
Lynn said wearily, "Even if what you say is true, they're not far ahead

of us.
We could build humanoid robots."
"Have we, sir?"
"Yes.
As a matter of fact, we have built a few models for experimental

purposes."
"They were doing so ten years ago.
They've made ten years' progress

since."
Lynn was disturbed.
He wondered if his incredulity concerning the whole

business were really the result of wounded pride and fear for his job

and reputation.
He was embarrassed by the possibility that this might

be so, and yet he was forced into defense.
He said, "Look, young man, the stalemate between Them and Us was never

perfect in every detail, you know.
They have always been ahead in one

facet or another and We in some other facet or another.
If They're

ahead of us right now in robotics, it's because They've placed a

greater proportion of Their effort into robotics than We have.
And that

means that some other branch of endeavor has received a greater share

of Our efforts than it has of Theirs.
It would mean We're ahead in

force-field research or in hyper-atomics, perhaps."
Lynn felt distressed at his own statement that the stalemate wasn't

perfect.
It was true enough, but that was the one great danger

threatening the world.
The world depended on the stalemate being as

perfect as possible.
If the small unevennesses that always existed

over-balanced too far in one direction or the other--



Almost at the beginning of what had been the Cold War, both sides

had developed thermonuclear weapons, and war became unthinkable.
Competition switched from the military to the economic and

psychological and had stayed there ever since.
But always there was the driving effort on each side to break the

stalemate, to develop a parry for every possible thrust, to develop

a thrust that could not be parried in time--something that would make

war possible again.
And that was not because either side wanted war so

desperately, but because both were afraid that the other side would

make the crucial discovery first.
For a hundred years each side had kept the struggle even.
And in the

process, peace had been maintained for a hundred years while, as

byproducts of the continuously intensive research, force-fields had

been produced and solar energy and insect control and robots.
Each side

was making a beginning in the understanding of mentalics, which was the

name given to the biochemistry and biophysics of thought.
Each side had

its outposts on the Moon and on Mars.
Mankind was advancing in giant

strides under forced draft.
It was even necessary for both sides to be as decent and humane as

possible among themselves, lest through cruelty and tyranny, friends be

made for the other side.
It couldn't be that the stalemate would now be broken and that there

would be war.
Lynn said, "I want to consult one of my men.
I want his opinion."
"Is he trustworthy?"
Lynn looked disgusted.
"Good Lord, what man in Robotics has not been

investigated and cleared to death by your people?
Yes, I vouch for

him.
If you can't trust a man like Humphrey Carl Laszlo, then we're in

no position to face the kind of attack you say They are launching, no

matter what else we do."
"I've heard of Laszlo," said Breckenridge.
"Good.
Does he pass?"
"Yes."
"Then, I'll have him in and we'll find out what he thinks about the

possibility that robots could invade the U. S.
A."
"Not exactly," said Breckenridge, softly.
"You still don't accept the

full truth.
Find out what he thinks about the fact that robots have

_already_ invaded the U. S.
A."
*       *       *       *       *



Laszlo was the grandson of a Hungarian who had broken through what

had then been called the Iron Curtain, and he had a comfortable

above-suspicion feeling about himself because of it.
He was thick-set

and balding with a pugnacious look graven forever on his snub face, but

his accent was clear Harvard and he was almost excessively soft-spoken.
To Lynn, who was conscious that after years of administration he was no

longer expert in the various phases of modern robotics, Laszlo was a

comforting receptacle for complete knowledge.
Lynn felt better because

of the man's mere presence.
Lynn said, "What do you think?"
A scowl twisted Laszlo's face ferociously.
"That They're that far ahead

of us.
Completely incredible.
It would mean They've produced humanoids

that could not be told from humans at close quarters.
It would mean a

considerable advance in robo-mentalics."
"You're personally involved," said Breckenridge, coldly.
"Leaving

professional pride out of account, exactly why is it impossible that

They be ahead of Us?"
Laszlo shrugged.
"I assure you that I'm well acquainted with Their

literature on robotics.
I know approximately where They are."
"You know approximately where They want you to _think_ They are, is

what you really mean," corrected Breckenridge.
"Have you ever visited

the other side?"
"I haven't," said Laszlo, shortly.
"Nor you, Dr.
Lynn?"
Lynn said, "No, I haven't, either."
Breckenridge said, "Has any robotics man visited the other side in

twenty-five years?"
He asked the question with a kind of confidence

that indicated he knew the answer.
For a matter of seconds, the atmosphere was heavy with thought.
Discomfort crossed Laszlo's broad face.
He said, "As a matter of fact,

They haven't held any conferences on robotics in a long time."
"In twenty-five years," said Breckenridge.
"Isn't that significant?"
"Maybe," said Laszlo, reluctantly.
"Something else bothers me, though.
None of Them have ever come to Our conferences on robotics.
None that I

can remember."
"Were They invited?"
asked Breckenridge.
Lynn, staring and worried, interposed quickly, "Of course."
Breckenridge said, "Do They refuse attendance to any other types of

scientific conferences We hold?"
"I don't know," said Laszlo.
He was pacing the floor now.
"I haven't

heard of any cases.
Have you, Chief?"
"No," said Lynn.
Breckenridge said, "Wouldn't you say it was as though They didn't want

to be put in the position of having to return any such invitation?
Or

as though They were afraid one of Their men might talk too much?"
That was exactly how it seemed, and Lynn felt a helpless conviction

that Security's story was true after all steal over him.
Why else had there been no contact between sides on robotics?
There

had been a cross-fertilizing trickle of researchers moving in both

directions on a strictly one-for-one basis for years, dating back

to the days of Eisenhower and Khrushchev.
There were a great many

good motives for that: an honest appreciation of the supra-national

character of science; impulses of friendliness that are hard to wipe

out completely in the individual human being; the desire to be exposed

to a fresh and interesting outlook and to have your own slightly-stale

notions greeted by others as fresh and interesting.
The governments themselves were anxious that this continue.
There was

always the obvious thought that by learning all you could and telling

as little as you could, your own side would gain by the exchange.
But not in the case of robotics.
Not there.
Such a little thing to carry conviction.
And a thing, moreover, they

had known all along.
Lynn thought, darkly: We've taken the complacent

way out.
Because the other side had done nothing publicly on robotics, it had

been tempting to sit back smugly and be comfortable in the assurance of

superiority.
Why hadn't it seemed possible, even likely, that They were

hiding superior cards, a trump hand, for the proper time?
Laszlo said, shakenly, "What do we do?"
It was obvious that the same

line of thought had carried the same conviction to him.
"Do?"
parroted Lynn.
It was hard to think right now of anything but of

the complete horror that came with conviction.
There were ten humanoid

robots somewhere in the United States, each one carrying a fragment of

a TC bomb.
TC!
The race for sheer horror in bomb-ery had ended there.
TC!
Total

Conversion!
The sun was no longer a synonym one could use.
Total

conversion made the sun a penny candle.
Ten humanoids, each completely harmless in separation, could, by the

simple act of coming together, exceed critical mass and--



Lynn rose to his feet heavily, the dark pouches under his eyes, which

ordinarily lent his ugly face a look of savage foreboding, more

prominent than ever.
"It's going to be up to us to figure out ways

and means of telling a humanoid from a human and then finding the

humanoids."
"How quickly?"
muttered Laszlo.
"Not later than five minutes before they get together," barked Lynn,

"and I don't know when that will be."
Breckenridge nodded.
"I'm glad you're with us now, sir.
I'm to bring

you back to Washington for conference, you know."
Lynn raised his eyebrows.
"All right."
He wondered if, had he delayed longer in being convinced, he might

not have been replaced forthwith--if some other Chief of the Bureau

of Robotics might not be conferring in Washington.
He suddenly wished

earnestly that exactly that had come to pass.
*       *       *       *       *



The First Presidential Assistant was there, the Secretary of Science,

the Secretary of Security, Lynn himself, and Breckenridge.
Five of them

sitting about a table in the dungeons of an underground fortress near

Washington.
Presidential Assistant Jeffreys was an impressive man, handsome in a

white-haired and just-a-trifle-jowly fashion, solid, thoughtful and as

unobtrusive, politically, as a Presidential Assistant ought to be.
He spoke incisively.
"There are three questions that face us as I see

it.
First, when are the humanoids going to get together?
Second, where

are they going to get together?
Third, how do we stop them before they

get together?"
Secretary of Science Amberley nodded convulsively at that.
He had been

Dean of Northwestern Engineering before his appointment.
He was thin,

sharp-featured and noticeably edgy.
His forefinger traced slow circles

on the table.
"As far as _when_ they'll get together," he said.
"I suppose it's

definite that it won't be for some time."
"Why do you say that?"
asked Lynn, sharply.
"They've been in the U. S. at least a month already.
So Security says."
Lynn turned automatically to look at Breckenridge, and Secretary of

Security Macalaster intercepted the glance.
Macalaster said, "The

information is reliable.
Don't let Breckenridge's apparent youth fool

you, Dr. Lynn.
That's part of his value to us.
Actually, he's 34 and

has been with the department for ten years.
He has been in Moscow for

nearly a year and without him, none of this terrible danger would be

known to us.
As it is, we have most of the details."
"Not the crucial ones," said Lynn.
Macalaster of Security smiled frostily.
His heavy chin and close-set

eyes were well-known to the public but almost nothing else about him

was.
He said, "We are all finitely human, Dr. Lynn.
Agent Breckenridge

has done a great deal."
Presidential Assistant Jeffreys cut in.
"Let us say we have a certain

amount of time.
If action at the instant were necessary, it would

have happened before this.
It seems likely that they are waiting for

a specific time.
If we knew the place, perhaps the time would become

self-evident.
"If they are going to TC a target, they will want to cripple us as much

as possible, so it would seem that a major city would have to be it.
In any case, a major metropolis is the only target worth a TC bomb.
I

think there are four possibilities: Washington, as the administrative

center; New York, as the financial center; and Detroit and Pittsburgh

as the two chief industrial centers."
Macalaster of Security said, "I vote for New York.
Administration

and industry have both been decentralized to the point where the

destruction of any one particular city won't prevent instant

retaliation."
"Then why New York?"
asked Amberly of Science, perhaps more sharply

than he intended.
"Finance has been decentralized as well."
"A question of morale.
It may be they intend to destroy our will to

resist, to induce surrender by the sheer horror of the first blow.
The greatest destruction of human life would be in the New York

Metropolitan area--"



"Pretty cold-blooded," muttered Lynn.
"I know," said Macalaster of Security, "but they're capable of it, if

they thought it would mean final victory at a stroke.
Wouldn't we--"



Presidential Assistant Jeffreys brushed back his white hair.
"Let's

assume the worst.
Let's assume that New York will be destroyed some

time during the winter, preferably immediately after a serious blizzard

when communications are at their worst and the disruption of utilities

and food supplies in fringe areas will be most serious in their effect.
Now, how do we stop them?"
Amberley of Science could only say, "Finding ten men in two hundred and

twenty million is an awfully small needle in an awfully large haystack."
Jeffreys shook his head.
"You have it wrong.
Ten humanoids among two

hundred twenty million humans."
"No difference," said Amberley of Science.
"We don't know that a

humanoid can be differentiated from a human at sight.
Probably not."
He

looked at Lynn.
They all did.
Lynn said heavily, "We in Cheyenne couldn't make one that would pass as

human in the daylight."
"But They can," said Macalaster of Security, "and not only physically.
We're sure of that.
They've advanced mentalic procedures to the point

where they can reel off the micro-electronic pattern of the brain and

focus it on the positronic pathways of the robot."
Lynn stared.
"Are you implying that they can create the replica of a

human being complete with personality and memory?"
"I do."
"Of specific human beings?"
"That's right."
"Is this also based on Agent Breckenridge's findings?"
"Yes.
The evidence can't be disputed."
Lynn bent his head in thought for a moment.
Then he said, "Then ten men

in the United States are not men but humanoids.
But the originals would

have had to be available to them.
They couldn't be Orientals, who would

be too easy to spot, so they would have to be East Europeans.
How would

they be introduced into this country, then?
With the radar network over

the entire world border as tight as a drum, how could They introduce

any individual, human or humanoid, without our knowing it?"
Macalaster of Security said, "It can be done.
There are certain

legitimate seepages across the border.
Businessmen, pilots, even

tourists.
They're watched, of course, on both sides.
Still ten of

them might have been kidnapped and used as models for humanoids.
The

humanoids would then be sent back in their place.
Since we wouldn't

expect such a substitution, it would pass us by.
If they were Americans

to begin with, there would be no difficulty in their getting into this

country.
It's as simple as that."
"And even their friends and family could not tell the difference?"
"We must assume so.
Believe me, we've been waiting for any report

that might imply sudden attacks of amnesia or troublesome changes in

personality.
We've checked on thousands."
Amberley of Science stared at his finger-tips.
"I think ordinary

measures won't work.
The attack must come from the Bureau of Robotics

and I depend on the chief of that bureau."
Again eyes turned sharply, expectantly, on Lynn.
Lynn felt bitterness rise.
It seemed to him that this was what the

conference came to and was intended for.
Nothing that had been said had

not been said before.
He was sure of that.
There was no solution to

the problem, no pregnant suggestion.
It was a device for the record, a

device on the part of men who gravely feared defeat and who wished the

responsibility for it placed clearly and unequivocally on someone else.
And yet there was justice in it.
It was in robotics that We had fallen

short.
And Lynn was not Lynn merely.
He was Lynn of Robotics and the

responsibility had to be his.
He said, "I will do what I can."
*       *       *       *       *



He spent a wakeful night and there was a haggardness about both

body and soul when he sought and attained another interview with

Presidential Assistant Jeffreys the next morning.
Breckenridge was

there, and though Lynn would have preferred a private conference,

he could see the justice in the situation.
It was obvious that

Breckenridge had attained enormous influence with the government as a

result of his successful Intelligence work.
Well, why not?
Lynn said, "Sir, I am considering the possibility that we are hopping

uselessly to enemy piping."
"In what way?"
"I'm sure that however impatient the public may grow at times, and

however legislators sometimes find it expedient to talk, the government

at least recognizes the world stalemate to be beneficial.
They must

recognize it also.
Ten humanoids with one TC bomb is a trivial way of

breaking the stalemate."
"The destruction of fifteen million human beings is scarcely trivial."
"It is from the world power standpoint.
It would not so demoralize us

as to make us surrender or so cripple us as to convince us we could not

win.
There would just be the same old planetary death-war that both

sides have avoided so long and so successfully.
And all They would have

accomplished is to force us to fight minus one city.
It's not enough."
"What do you suggest?"
said Jeffreys, coldly.
"That They do not have

ten humanoids in our country?
That there is not a TC bomb waiting to

get together?"
"I'll agree that those things are here, but perhaps for some reason

greater than just mid-winter bomb-madness."
"Such as?"
"It may be that the physical destruction resulting from the humanoids

getting together is not the worst thing that can happen to us.
What

about the moral and intellectual destruction that comes of their being

here at all?
With all due respect to Agent Breckenridge, what if

They _intended_ for us to find out about the humanoids; what if the

humanoids are never supposed to get together, but merely to remain

separate in order to give us something to worry about."
"Why?"
"Tell me this.
What measures have already been taken against the

humanoids?
I suppose that Security is going through the files of all

citizens who have ever been across the border or close enough to it

to make kidnapping possible.
I know, since Macalaster mentioned it

yesterday, that they are following up suspicious psychiatric cases.
What else?"
Jeffreys said, "Small X-ray devices are being installed in key places

in the large cities.
In the mass arenas, for instance--"



"Where ten humanoids might slip in among a hundred thousand spectators

of a football game or an air-polo match?"
"Exactly."
"And concert halls and churches?"
"We must start somewhere.
We can't do it all at once."
"Particularly when panic must be avoided?"
said Lynn.
"Isn't that so?
It wouldn't do to have the public realize that at any unpredictable

moment, some unpredictable city and its human contents would suddenly

cease to exist."
"I suppose that's obvious.
What are you driving at?"
Lynn said strenuously, "That a growing fraction of our national effort

will be diverted entirely into the nasty problem of what Amberley

called finding a very small needle in a very large haystack.
We'll

be chasing our tails madly, while They increase their research

lead to the point where we find we can no longer catch up; when we

must surrender without the chance even of snapping our fingers in

retaliation.
"Consider further that this news will leak out as more and more people

become involved in our counter-measures and more and more people begin

to guess what we're doing.
Then what?
The panic might do us more harm

than any one TC bomb."
The Presidential Assistant said, irritably, "In Heaven's name, man,

what do you suggest we do, then?"
"Nothing," said Lynn.
"Call their bluff.
Live as we have lived and

gamble that They won't dare break the stalemate for the sake of a

one-bomb headstart."
"Impossible!"
said Jeffreys.
"Completely impossible.
The welfare of all

of Us is very largely in my hands, and doing nothing is the one thing

I cannot do.
I agree with you, perhaps, that X-ray machines at sports

arenas are a kind of skin-deep measure that won't be effective, but it

has to be done so that people, in the aftermath, do not come to the

bitter conclusion that we tossed our country away for the sake of a

subtle line of reasoning that encouraged do-nothingism.
In fact, our

counter-gambit will be active indeed."
"In what way?"
Presidential Assistant Jeffreys looked at Breckenridge.
The young

Security officer, hitherto calmly silent, said, "It's no use talking

about a possible future break in the stalemate when the stalemate is

broken now.
It doesn't matter whether these humanoids explode or do

not.
Maybe they _are_ only a bait to divert us, as you say.
But the

fact remains that we are a quarter of a century behind in robotics, and

that may be fatal.
What other advances in robotics will there be to

surprise us if war does start?
The only answer is to divert our entire

force immediately, _now_, into a crash program of robotics research,

and the first problem is to find the humanoids.
Call it an exercise

in robotics, if you will, or call it the prevention of the death of

fifteen million men, women and children."
Lynn shook his head, helplessly, "You _can't_.
You'd be playing into

their hands.
They want us lured into the one blind alley while they're

free to advance in all other directions."
Jeffreys said, impatiently, "That's your guess.
Breckenridge has made

his suggestion through channels and the government has approved, and we

will begin with an all-Science conference."
"All-Science?"
Breckenridge said, "We have listed every important scientist of every

branch of natural science.
They'll all be at Cheyenne.
There will

be only one point on the agenda: How to advance robotics.
The major

specific sub-heading under that will be: How to develop a receiving

device for the electromagnetic fields of the cerebral cortex that will

be sufficiently delicate to distinguish between a protoplasmic human

brain and a positronic humanoid brain."
Jeffreys said, "We had hoped you would be willing to be in charge of

the conference."
"I was not consulted in this."
"Obviously time was short, sir.
Do you agree to be in charge?"
Lynn smiled briefly.
It was a matter of responsibility again.
The

responsibility must be clearly that of Lynn of Robotics.
He had the

feeling it would be Breckenridge who would really be in charge.
But

what could he do?
He said, "I agree."
*       *       *       *       *



Breckenridge and Lynn returned together to Cheyenne, where that evening

Laszlo listened with a sullen mistrust to Lynn's description of coming

events.
Laszlo said, "While you were gone, Chief, I've started putting

five experimental models of humanoid structure through the testing

procedures.
Our men are on a twelve-hour day, with three shifts

overlapping.
If we've got to arrange a conference, we're going to be

crowded and red-taped out of everything.
Work will come to a halt."
Breckenridge said, "That will be only temporary.
You will gain more

than you lose."
Laszlo scowled.
"A bunch of astrophysicists and geochemists around

won't help a damn toward robotics."
"Views from specialists of other fields may be helpful."
"Are you sure?
How do we know that there _is_ any way of detecting

brain waves or that, even if we can, there is a way of differentiating

human and humanoid by wave pattern.
Who set up the project, anyway?"
"I did," said Breckenridge.
"_You_ did?
Are you a robotics man?"
The young Security agent said, calmly, "I have studied robotics."
"That's not the same thing."
"I've had access to text-material dealing with Russian robotics--in

Russian.
Top-secret material well in advance of anything you have here."
Lynn said, ruefully, "He has us there, Laszlo."
"It was on the basis of that material," Breckenridge went on, "that

I suggested this particular line of investigation.
It is reasonably

certain that in copying off the electromagnetic pattern of a

specific human mind into a specific positronic brain, a perfectly

exact duplicate cannot be made.
For one thing, the most complicated

positronic brain small enough to fit into a human-sized skull is

hundreds of times less complex than the human brain.
It can't pick

up all the overtones, therefore, and there must be some way to take

advantage of that fact."
Laszlo looked impressed despite himself and Lynn smiled grimly.
It was

easy to resent Breckenridge and the coming intrusion of several hundred

scientists of non-robotics specialties, but the problem itself was an

intriguing one.
There was that consolation, at least.
*       *       *       *       *



It came to him quietly.
Lynn found he had nothing to do but sit in his office alone, with an

executive position that had grown merely titular.
Perhaps that helped.
It gave him time to think, to picture the creative scientists of half

the world converging on Cheyenne.
It was Breckenridge who, with cool efficiency, was handling the details

of preparation.
There had been a kind of confidence in the way he said,

"Let's get together and we'll lick Them."
Let's get together.
It came to Lynn so quietly that anyone watching Lynn at that moment

might have seen his eyes blink slowly twice--but surely nothing more.
He did what he had to do with a whirling detachment that kept him calm

when he felt that, by all rights, he ought to be going mad.
He sought out Breckenridge in the other's improvised quarters.
Breckenridge was alone and frowning.
"Is anything wrong, sir?"
Lynn said, wearily, "Everything's right, I think.
I've invoked martial

law."
"What!"
"As chief of a division I can do so if I am of the opinion the

situation warrants it.
Over my division, I can then be dictator.
Chalk

up one for the beauties of decentralization."
"You will rescind that order immediately."
Breckenridge took a step

forward.
"When Washington hears this, you will be ruined."
"I'm ruined anyway.
Do you think I don't realize that I've been set up

for the role of the greatest villain in American history: the man who

let Them break the stalemate.
I have nothing to lose--and perhaps a

great deal to gain."
He laughed a little wildly, "What a target the Division of Robotics

will be, eh, Breckenridge?
Only a few thousand men to be killed by

a TC bomb capable of wiping out three hundred square miles in one

micro-second.
But five hundred of those men would be our greatest

scientists.
We would be in the peculiar position of having to fight a

war with our brains shot out, or surrendering.
I think we'd surrender."
"But this is impossible.
Lynn, do you hear me?
Do you understand?
How

could the humanoids pass our security provisions?
How could they get

together?"
"But they _are_ getting together!
We're helping them to do so.
We're ordering them to do so.
Our scientists visit the other side,

Breckenridge.
They visit Them regularly.
You made a point of how

strange it was that no one in robotics did.
Well, ten of those

scientists are still there and in their place, ten humanoids are

converging on Cheyenne."
"That's a ridiculous guess."
"I think it's a good one, Breckenridge.
But it wouldn't work unless we

knew humanoids were in America so that we would call the conference in

the first place.
Quite a coincidence that you brought the news of the

humanoids _and_ suggested the conference _and_ suggested the agenda

_and_ are running the show and know exactly which scientists were

invited.
Did you make sure the right ten were included?"
"Dr.
Lynn!"
cried Breckenridge in outrage.
He poised to rush forward.
Lynn said, "Don't move.
I've got a blaster here.
We'll just wait for

the scientists to get here one by one.
One by one we'll X-ray them.
One

by one, we'll monitor them for radioactivity.
No two will get together

without being checked, and if all five hundred are clear, I'll give

you my blaster and surrender to you.
Only I think we'll find the ten

humanoids.
Sit down, Breckenridge."
They both sat.
Lynn said, "We wait.
When I'm tired, Laszlo will spell me.
We wait."
*       *       *       *       *



Professor Manuelo Jiminez of the Institute of Higher Studies of Buenos

Aires exploded while the stratospheric jet on which he traveled was

three miles above the Amazon Valley.
It was a simple chemical explosion

but it was enough to destroy the plane.
Dr. Herman Liebowitz of M. I. T. exploded in a monorail, killing twenty

people and injuring a hundred others.
In similar manner, Dr. Auguste Marin of L'Institut NuclÃ©onique of

Montreal and seven others died at various stages of their journey to

Cheyenne.
*       *       *       *       *



Laszlo hurtled in, pale-faced and stammering, with the first news

of it.
It had only been two hours that Lynn had sat there, facing

Breckenridge, blaster in hand.
Laszlo said, "I thought you were nuts, Chief, but you were right.
They _were_ humanoids.
They _had_ to be."
He turned to stare with

hate-filled eyes at Breckenridge.
"Only they were warned.
_He_ warned

them, and now there won't be one left intact.
Not one to study."
"God!"
cried Lynn and in a frenzy of haste thrust his blaster out

toward Breckenridge and fired.
The Security man's neck vanished; the

torso fell; the head dropped, thudded against the floor and rolled

crookedly.
Lynn moaned, "I didn't understand, I thought he was a traitor.
Nothing

more."
And Laszlo stood immobile, mouth open, for the moment incapable of

speech.
Lynn said, wildly.
"Sure, he warned them.
But how could he do so while

sitting in that chair unless he were equipped with built-in radio

transmission?
Don't you see it?
Breckenridge had been in Moscow.
The

real Breckenridge is still there.
Oh my God, there were _eleven_ of

them."
Laszlo managed a hoarse squeak.
"Why didn't _he_ explode?"
"He was hanging on, I suppose, to make sure the others had received his

message and were safely destroyed.
Lord, Lord, when you brought the

news and I realized the truth, I couldn't shoot fast enough.
God knows

by how few seconds I may have beaten him to it."
Laszlo said, shakily, "At least, we'll have one to study."
He bent

and put his fingers on the sticky fluid trickling out of the mangled

remains at the neck end of the headless body.
Not blood, but high-grade machine oil.
[Illustration: “My God ... watch out!
It’s nitroglycerine!”]





                      The Magnificent Possession



                            By Isaac Asimov





        Walter Sills labored for years as an unknown laboratory

        worker--but at fifty he makes his great discovery!
Fame,

        riches are to be his fate--until interference looms up

        in the form of a few unreliable characters--and Nature

        herself!
Walter Sills reflected now, as he had reflected often before, that life

was hard and joyless.
He surveyed his dingy chemical laboratory and

grinned cynically--working in a dirty hole of a place, living on

occasional ore analyses that barely paid for absolutely indispensable

equipment, while others, not half his worth perhaps, were working for

big industrial concerns and taking life easy.
He looked out the window at the Hudson River, ruddied in the flame of

the dying sun, and wondered moodily whether these last experiments

would finally bring him the fame and success he was after, or if they

were merely some more false alarms.
The unlocked door creaked open a crack and the cheerful face of Eugene

Taylor burst into view.
Sills waved and Taylor’s body followed his head

and entered the laboratory.
“Hello, old soak,” came the loud and carefree hail.
“How go things?”



Sills shook his head at the other’s exuberance.
“I wish I had your

foolish outlook on life, Gene.
For your information, things are bad.
I

need money, and the more I need it, the less I have.”



“Well, I haven’t any money either, have I?” demanded Taylor.
“But why

worry about it?
You’re fifty, and worry hasn’t got you anything except

a bald head.
I’m thirty, and I want to keep my beautiful brown hair.”



The chemist grinned.
“I’ll get my money, yet, Gene.
Just leave it to

me.”



“Your new ideas shaping out well?”



“Are they?
I haven’t told you much about it, have I?
Well, come here

and I’ll show you what progress I’ve made.”



Taylor followed Sills to a small table, on which stood a rack of

test-tubes, in one of which was about half an inch of a shiny metallic

substance.
“Sodium-mercury mixture, or sodium amalgam, as it is called,” explained

Sills, pointing to it.
He took a bottle labeled “Ammonium Chloride Sol.” from the shelf and

poured a little into the tube.
Immediately the sodium amalgam began

changing into a loosely-packed, spongy substance.
“That,” observed Sills, “is ammonium amalgam.
The ammonium radical

(NH₄) acts as a metal here and combines with mercury.” He waited for

the action to go to completion and then poured off the supernatant

liquid.
“Ammonium amalgam isn’t very stable,” he informed Taylor, “so I’ll have

to work fast.” He grasped a flask of straw-colored, pleasant-smelling

liquid and filled the test-tube with it.
Upon shaking, the

loosely-packed ammonium amalgam vanished and in its stead a small drop

of metallic liquid rolled about the bottom.
Taylor gazed at the test-tube, open-mouthed.
“What happened?”



“This liquid is a complex derivative of Hydrazine which I’ve discovered

and named Ammonaline.
I haven’t worked out its formula yet, but that

doesn’t matter.
The point about it is that it has the property of

dissolving the ammonium out of the amalgam.
Those few drops at the

bottom are pure mercury; the ammonium is in solution.”



Taylor remained unresponsive and Sills waxed enthusiastic.
“Don’t you

see the implications?
I’ve gone half way towards isolating pure

ammonium, a thing which has never been done before!
Once accomplished

it means fame, success, the Nobel Prize, and who knows what else.”



“Wow!” Taylor’s gaze became more respectful.
“That yellow stuff doesn’t

look so important to me.” He snatched for it, but Sills withheld it.
“I haven’t finished by any means, Gene.
I’ve got to get it in its free

metallic state, and I can’t do that so far.
Every time I try to

evaporate the Ammonaline, the ammonium breaks down to everlasting

ammonia and hydrogen....
But I’ll get it--I’ll get it!”



                 *       *       *       *       *



Two weeks later, the epilogue to the previous scene was enacted.
Taylor

received a hurried and emphatic call from his chemist friend and

appeared at the laboratory in a flurry of anticipation.
“You’ve got it?”



“I’ve got it--and it’s bigger than I thought!
There’s millions in it,

really,” Sills’ eyes shone with rapture.
“I’ve been working from the wrong angle up to now,” he explained.
“Heating the solvent always broke down the dissolved ammonium, so I

separated it out by freezing.
It works the same way as brine, which,

when frozen slowly, freezes into fresh ice, the salt crystallizing out.
Luckily, the Ammonaline freezes at 18 degrees Centigrade and doesn’t

require much cooling.”



He pointed dramatically to a small beaker, inside a glass-walled case.
The beaker contained pale, straw-colored, needle-like crystals and

covering the top of this, a thin layer of a dullish, yellow substance.
“Why the case?” asked Taylor.
“I’ve got it filled with argon to keep the ammonium (which is the

yellow substance on top of the Ammonaline) pure.
It is so active that

it will react with anything else but a helium-type gas.”



Taylor marveled and pounded his complacently-smiling friend on the

back.
“Wait, Gene, the best is yet to come.”



Taylor was led to the other end of the room and Sills’ trembling finger

pointed out another airtight case containing a lump of metal of a

gleaming yellow that sparkled and glistened.
“That, my friend, is ammonium oxide (NH4₂O), formed by passing

_absolutely dry_ air over free ammonium metal.
It is perfectly inert

(the sealed case contains quite a bit of chlorine, for instance, and

yet there is no reaction).
It can be made as cheaply as aluminum, if

not more so, and yet it looks more like gold than gold does itself.
Do

you see the possibilities?”



“Do I?” exploded Taylor.
“It will sweep the country.
You can have

ammonium jewelry, and ammonium-plated table-ware, and a million other

things.
Then again, who knows how many countless industrial

applications it may have?
You’re rich, Walt--you’re rich!”



“_We’re_ rich,” corrected Sills gently.
He moved towards the telephone.
“The newspapers are going to hear of this.
I’m going to begin to cash

in on fame right now.”



Taylor frowned, “Maybe you’d better keep it a secret, Walt.”



“Oh, I’m not breathing a hint as to the process.
I’ll just give them

the general idea.
Besides, we’re safe; the patent application is in

Washington right now.”



But Sills was wrong!
The article in the paper ushered in a very, very

hectic two days for the two of them.
*       *       *       *       *



J. Throgmorton Bankhead is what is commonly known as a “captain of

   industry.” As head of the Acme Chromium and Silver Plating

   Corporation, he no doubt deserved the title; but to his patient and

   long-suffering wife, he was merely a dyspeptic and grouchy husband,

   especially at the breakfast table ... and he was at the breakfast

   table now.
Rustling his morning paper angrily, he sputtered between bites of

buttered toast, “This man is ruining the country.” He pointed aghast at

big, black headlines.
“I said before and I’ll say again that the man is

as crazy as a bedbug.
He won’t be satisfied....”



“Joseph, please,” pleaded his wife, “you’re getting purple in the face.
Remember your high blood pressure.
You know the doctor told you to stop

reading the news from Washington if it annoys you so.
Now, listen dear,

about the cook.
She’s....”



“The doctor’s a damn fool, and so are you,” shouted J. Throgmorton

Bankhead.
“I’ll read all the news I please and get purple in the face

too, if I want to.”



He raised the cup of coffee to his mouth and took a critical sip.
While

he did so, his eyes fell upon a more insignificant headline towards the

bottom of the page: “Savant Discovers Gold Substitute.”



                 *       *       *       *       *



The coffee cup remained in the air while he scanned the article

quickly.
“This new metal,” it ran in part, “is claimed by its

discoverer to be far superior to chromium, nickel, or silver for

plating purposes, besides being ideal material for cheap and beautiful

jewelry.
‘The twenty-dollar-a-week clerk,’ said Professor Sills, ‘will

eat off ammonium plate more impressive in appearance than the gold

plate of the Indian Nabob.’ There is no....”



But J. Throgmorton Bankhead had stopped reading.
Visions of a ruined

Acme Chromium and Silver Plating Corporation danced before his eyes;

and as they danced, the cup of coffee dropped from his hand, and

splashed hot liquid over his trousers.
His wife rose to her feet in alarm, “What is it, Joseph; what is it?”



“Nothing,” Bankhead shouted.
“Nothing.
For God’s sake, go away, will

you?”



He strode angrily out of the room, leaving his wife to search the paper

in vain for anything that could have disturbed him.
“Bob’s Tavern” on Fifteenth Street is usually pretty well filled at all

times, but on the morning we are speaking of, it was empty except for

four or five rather poorly-dressed men, who clustered about the portly

and dignified form of Peter Q. Hornswoggle, eminent ex-Congressman.
Peter Q. Hornswoggle was, as usual, speaking fluently.
His subject,

again, as usual, concerned the life of a Congressman.
“I remember a case in point,” he was saying, “when that same argument

was brought up in the house, and which I answered as follows: ‘The

eminent gentleman from Nevada in his statements overlooks one very

important aspect of the problem.
He does not realize that it is to the

interest of the entire nation that the apple-parers of this country be

attended to promptly; for, gentlemen, on the welfare of the

apple-parers depends the future of the entire fruit industry and on the

fruit-industry is based the entire economy of this great and glorious

nation, the United States of America.”



Hornswoggle paused, swallowed half a pint of beer at once, and then

smiled in triumph, “I have no hesitation in saying, gentlemen, that at

that statement, the entire House burst into wild and tumultuous

applause.”



One of the assembled listeners shook his head slowly and marveled.
“It

must be great to be able to spiel like that, Senator.
You musta been a

sensation.”



“Yeah,” agreed the bartender, “it’s a dirty shame you were beat last

election.”



The ex-Congressman winced and in a very dignified tone began, “I have

been reliably informed that the use of bribery in that campaign reached

unprecedented prop....” His voice died away suddenly as he caught sight

of a certain article in the newspaper of one of his listeners.
He

snatched at it and read it through in silence and thereupon his eyes

gleamed with a sudden idea.
“My friends,” he said turning to them again, “I find I must leave you.
There is pressing work that must be done immediately at City Hall.” He

leant over to whisper to the barkeeper, “You haven’t got twenty-five

cents, have you?
I find I left my wallet in the Mayor’s office by

mistake.
I will surely repay you tomorrow.”



Clutching the quarter, reluctantly given, Peter Q. Hornswoggle left.
*       *       *       *       *



In a small and dimly lit room somewhere in the lower reaches of First

Avenue, Michael Maguire, known to the police by the far more euphonious

name of Mike the Slug, cleaned his trusty revolver and hummed a

tuneless song.
The door opened a crack and Mike looked up.
“That you, Slappy?”



“Yeh,” a short, wizened person sidled in, “I brung ya de evenin’ sheet.
De cops are still tinkin’ Bragoni pulled de job.”



“Yeh?
That’s good.” He bent unconcernedly over the revolver.
“Anything

else doing?”



“Naw!
Some dippy dame killed herself, but dat’s all.”



He tossed the newspaper to Mike and left.
Mike leaned back and flipped

the pages in a bored manner.
A headline attracted his eye and he read the short article that

followed.
Having finished, he threw aside the paper, lit a cigarette,

and did some heavy thinking.
Then he opened the door.
“Hey, Slappy, c’mere.
There’s a job that’s got to be done.”





A NIGHT OF TROUBLE



Walter Sills was happy, deliriously so.
He walked about his laboratory

king of all he surveyed, strutting like a peacock, basking in his

new-found glory.
Eugene Taylor sat and watched him, scarcely less happy

himself.
“How does it feel to be famous?” Taylor wanted to know.
“Like a million dollars; and that’s what I’m going to sell the secret

of ammonium metal for.
It’s the fat of the land for me from now on.”



“You leave the practical details to me, Walt.
I’m getting in touch with

Staples of Eagle Steel today.
You’ll get a decent price from him.”



The bell rang, and Sills jumped.
He ran to open the door.
“Is this the home of Walter Sills?” The large, scowling visitor gazed

about him superciliously.
“Yes, I’m Sills.
Do you wish to see me?”



“Yes.
My name is J. Throgmorton Bankhead and I represent the Acme

Chromium and Silver Plating Corporation.
I would like to have a

moment’s discussion with you.”



“Come right in.
Come right in!
This is Eugene Taylor, my associate.
You

may speak freely before him.”



“Very well,” Bankhead seated himself heavily.
“I suppose you surmise

the reason for my visit.”



“I take it that you have read of the new ammonium metal in the papers.”



“That’s right.
I have come to see whether there is any truth in the

story and to buy your process if there is.”



“You can see for yourself, sir,” Sills led the magnate to where the

argon-filled container of the few grams of pure ammonium were.
“That is

the metal.
Over here to the right, I’ve got the oxide, an oxide which

is more metallic than the metal itself, strangely enough.
It is the

oxide that is what the papers call ‘substitute gold’.”



Bankhead’s face showed not an atom of the sinking feeling within him as

he viewed the oxide with dismay.
“Take it out in the open,” he said,

“and let’s see it.”



Sills shook his head.
“I can’t, Mr. Bankhead.
Those are the first

samples of ammonium and ammonium oxide that ever existed.
They’re

museum pieces.
I can easily make more for you, if you wish.”



“You’ll have to, if you expect me to sink my money in it.
You satisfy

me and I’ll be willing to buy your patent for as much as--oh, say a

thousand dollars.”



“A thousand dollars!” exclaimed Sills and Taylor together.
“A very fair price, gentlemen.”



“A million would be more like it,” shouted Taylor in an outraged tone.
“This discovery is a goldmine.”



                 *       *       *       *       *



“A million, indeed!
You are dreaming, gentlemen.
The fact of the matter

is that my company has been on the track of ammonium for years now, and

we are just at the point of solving the problem.
Unfortunately you beat

us by a week or so, and so I wish to buy up your patent in order to

save my company a great deal of annoyance.
You realize, of course, that

if you refuse my price, I could just go ahead and manufacture the

metal, using my own process.”



“We’ll sue if you do,” said Taylor.
“Have you got the money for a long, protracted--and

expensive--lawsuit?” Bankhead smiled nastily.
“I have, you know.
To

prove, however, that I am not unreasonable, I will make the price two

thousand.”



“You’ve heard our price,” answered Taylor stonily, “and we have nothing

further to say.”



“All right, gentlemen,” Bankhead walked towards the door, “think it

over.
You’ll see it my way, I’m sure.”



He opened the door and revealed the symmetrical form of Peter Q.

Hornswoggle bent in rapt concentration at the keyhole.
Bankhead sneered

audibly and the ex-Congressman jumped to his feet in consternation,

bowing rapidly two or three times, for want of anything better to do.
The financier passed by disdainfully and Hornswoggle entered, slammed

the door behind him, and faced the two bewildered friends.
“That man, my dear sirs, is a malefactor of great wealth, an economic

royalist.
He is the type of predatory interest that is the ruination of

this country.
You did quite right in refusing his offer.” He placed his

hand on his ample chest and smiled at them benignantly.
“Who the devil are you?” rasped Taylor, suddenly recovering from his

initial surprise.
“I?” Hornswoggle was taken aback.
“Why--er--I am Peter Quintus

Hornswoggle.
Surely, you know me.
I was in the House of Representatives

last year.”



“Never heard of you.
What do you want?”



“Why, bless me!
I read in the papers of your wonderful discovery and

have come to place my services at your feet.”



“What services?”



“Well, after all, you two are not men of the world.
With your new

invention, you are prey for every self-seeking unscrupulous person that

comes along--like Bankhead, for instance.
Now, a practical man of

affairs, such as I, one with experience of the world, would be of

inestimable use to you.
I could handle your affairs, attend to details,

see that--”



“All for nothing, of course, eh?” Taylor asked, sardonically.
Hornswoggle coughed convulsively.
“Well, naturally, I thought that a

small interest in your discovery might fittingly be assigned to me.”



Sills, who had remained silent during all this, rose to his feet

suddenly.
“Get out of here!
Did you hear me?
Get out, before I call the

police.”



“Now, Professor Sills, pray don’t get excited,” Hornswoggle retreated

uneasily towards the door which Taylor held open for him.
He passed out

still protesting, and swore softly to himself when the door slammed in

his face.
Sills sank wearily into the nearest chair.
“What are we to do, Gene?
He

offers only two thousand.
A week ago that would have been beyond

anything I could have hoped for, but now--”



“Forget it.
The fellow was only bluffing.
Listen, I’m going right now

to call on Staples.
We’ll sell to him for what we can get (it ought to

be plenty) and then if there’s any trouble with Bankhead--well, that’s

Staples’ worry.” He patted the other on the shoulder.
“Our troubles are

practically over.”



Unfortunately, however, Taylor was wrong; their troubles were only

beginning.
*       *       *       *       *



Across the street, a furtive figure, with beady eyes peering from

upturned coat collar, surveyed the house carefully.
A curious policeman

might have identified him as “Slappy” Egan, if he had bothered to look,

but no one did and “Slappy” remained unmolested.
“Cripes,” he muttered to himself, “dis is gonna be a cinch.
De whole

woiks on the bottom floor, back window can be jimmied wid a toot’pick,

no alarms, no nuttin.” He chuckled and walked away.
Nor was “Slappy” alone with his ideas.
Peter Q. Hornswoggle, as he

walked away, found strange thoughts wandering through his massive

cranium--thoughts which involved a certain amount of unorthodox action.
And J. Throgmorton Bankhead was likewise active.
Belonging to that

virile class known as “go-getters” and being not at all scrupulous as

to how he “go-got,” and certainly not intending to pay a million

dollars for the secret of ammonium, he found it necessary to call on a

certain one of his acquaintances.
This acquaintance, while a very useful one, was a bit unsavory, and

Bankhead found it advisable to be very careful and cautious while

visiting him.
However, the conversation that ensued ended in a pleasing

manner for both of them.
*       *       *       *       *



Walter Sills snapped out of an uneasy sleep with startled suddenness.
He listened anxiously for a while and then leaned over and nudged

Taylor.
He was rewarded by a few incoherent snuffles.
“Gene, Gene, wake up!
Come on, get up!”



“Eh?
What is it?
What are you bothering--”



“Shut up!
Listen, do you hear it?”



“I don’t hear anything.
Leave me alone, will you?”



Sills put his finger on his lips, and the other quieted.
There was a

distinct shuffling noise down below, in the laboratory.
Taylor’s eyes widened and sleep left them entirely.
“Burglars!” he

whispered.
The two crept out of bed, donned bathrobe and slippers, and tiptoed to

the door.
Taylor had a revolver and took the lead in descending the

stairs.
They had traversed perhaps half the flight, when there was a sudden,

surprised shout from below, followed by a series of loud, threshing

noises.
This continued for a few moments and then there was a loud

crash of glassware.
“My ammonium!” cried Sills in a stricken voice and rushed headlong down

the stairs, evading Taylor’s clutching arms.
The chemist burst into the laboratory, followed closely by his cursing

associate, and clicked the lights on.
Two struggling figures blinked

owlishly in the sudden illumination, and separated.
Taylor’s gun covered them.
“Well, isn’t this nice,” he said.
One of the two lurched to his feet from amid a tangle of broken beakers

and flasks, and, nursing a cut on his wrist, bent his portly body in a

still dignified bow.
It was Peter Q. Hornswoggle.
“No doubt,” he said, eyeing the unwavering firearm nervously, “the

circumstances seem suspicious, but I can explain very easily.
You see,

in spite of the very rough treatment I received after having made my

reasonable proposal, I still felt a great deal of kindly interest in

you two.
“Therefore, being a man of the world, and knowing the iniquities of

mankind, I just decided to keep an eye on your house tonight, for I saw

you had neglected to take precautions against house-breakers.
Judge my

surprise to see this dastardly creature,” he pointed to the flat-nosed,

plug-ugly, who still remained on the floor in a daze, “creeping in at

the back window.
“Immediately, I risked life and limb in following the criminal,

attempting desperately to save your great discovery.
I really feel I

deserve great credit for what I have done.
I’m sure you will feel that

I am a valuable person to deal with and reconsider your answers to my

earlier proposals.”



Taylor listened to all this with a cynical smile.
“You can certainly

lie fluently, can’t you, P.
Q.?”



He would have continued at greater length and with greater forcefulness

had not the other burglar suddenly raised his voice in loud protest.
“Cripes, boss, dis fat slob here is only tryin’ to get me in bad.
I’m

just followin’ orders, boss.
A fellow hired me to come in here and

rifle the safe and I’m just oinin’ a bit o’ honest money.
Just plain

safe-crackin’, boss, I ain’t out to hurt no one.
“Den, just as I was gettin’ down to de job--warmin’ up, so to say--in

crawls dis little guy wid a chisel and blowtorch and makes for de safe.
Well, natur’lly, I don’t like no competition, so I lays for him and

then--”



But Hornswoggle had drawn himself up in icy hauteur.
“It remains to be

seen whether the word of a gangster is to be taken before the word of

one, who, I may truthfully say, was, in his time, one of the most

eminent members of the great--”



“Quiet, both of you,” shouted Taylor, waving the gun threateningly.
“I’m calling the police and you can annoy _them_ with your stories.
Say, Walt, is everything all right?”



“I think so!” Sills returned from his inspection of the laboratory.
“They only knocked over empty glassware.
Everything else is unharmed.”



“That’s good,” Taylor began, and then choked in dismay.
From the hallway, a cool individual, hat drawn well over his eyes,

entered.
A revolver, expertly handled, changed the situation

considerably.
“O.
K.,” he grunted at Taylor, “drop the gat!” The other’s weapon

slipped from reluctant fingers and hit the floor with a clank.
The new menace surveyed the four others with a sardonic glance.
“Well!
So there were two others trying to beat me to it.
This seems to be a

very popular place.”



                 *       *       *       *       *



Sills and Taylor stared stupidly, while Hornswoggle’s teeth chattered

energetically.
The first mobster moved back uneasily, muttering as he

did so, “For Pete’s sake, it’s Mike the Slug.”



“Yeah,” Mike rasped, “Mike the Slug.
There’s lots of guys who know me

and who know I ain’t afraid to pull the trigger anytime I feel like.
Come on, Baldy, hand over the works.
You know--the stuff about your

fake gold.
Come on, before I count five.”



Sills moved slowly toward the old safe in the corner.
Mike stepped back

carelessly to give him room, and in so doing, his coat sleeve brushed

against a shelf.
A small vial of sodium sulphate solution tottered and

fell.
With sudden inspiration, Sills yelled, “My God, watch out!
It’s

nitroglycerine!”



The vial hit the floor with the smashing tinkle of broken glass, and

involuntarily, Mike yelled and jumped in wild dismay.
And as he did so,

Taylor crashed into him with a beautiful flying tackle.
At the same

time, Sills lunged for Taylor’s fallen weapon to cover the other two.
For this, however, there was no longer need.
At the very beginning of

the confusion, both had faded hurriedly into the night from whence they

came.
Taylor and Mike the Slug rolled round and round the laboratory floor,

locked in desperate struggle while Sills hopped over and about them,

praying for a moment of comparative quiet that he might bring the

revolver into sharp and sudden contact with the gangster’s skull.
But no such moment came.
Suddenly Mike lunged, caught Taylor stunningly

under the chin, and jerked free.
Sills yelled in consternation and

pulled the trigger at the fleeing figure.
The shot was wild and Mike

escaped unharmed.
Sills made no attempt to follow.
A sluicing stream of cold water brought Taylor back to his senses.
He

shook his head dazedly as he surveyed the surrounding shambles.
“Whew!” he said, “What a night!”



Sills groaned, “What are we going to do now, Gene?
Our very lives are

in danger.
I never thought of the possibility of thieves, or I would

never have told of the discovery to the newspapers.”



“Oh well, the harm’s done; no use weeping over it.
Now listen, the

first thing we have to do now is to get back to sleep.
They won’t

bother us again tonight.
Tomorrow, you’ll go to the bank and put the

papers outlining the details of the process in the vault (which you

should have done long ago).
Staples will be here at 3 p.m.; we’ll close

the deal, and then, at last, we’ll live happily ever after.”



The chemist shook his head dolefully.
“Ammonium has certainly proved to

be very upsetting so far.
I almost wish I had never heard of it.
I’d

almost rather be back doing ore analysis.”





AN UNEXPECTED SURPRISE!
As Walter Sills rattled cross-town towards his bank, he found no reason

to change his wish.
Even the comforting and homely jiggling of his

ancient and battered automobile failed to cheer him.
From a life

characterized by peaceful monotony, he had entered a period of bedlam,

and he was not at all satisfied with the change.
“Riches, like poverty, has its own peculiar problems,” he remarked

sententiously to himself as he braked the car before the two-story,

marble edifice that was the bank.
He stepped out carefully, stretched

his cramped legs, and headed for the revolving door.
He didn’t get there right away, though.
Two husky specimens of the

human race stepped up, one at each side, and Sills felt a very hard

object pressing with painful intensity against his ribs.
He opened his

mouth involuntarily, and was rewarded by an icy voice in his ears,

“Quiet, Baldy, or you’ll get what you deserve for the damn trick you

pulled on me last night.”



Sills shivered and subsided.
He recognized Mike the Slug’s voice very

easily.
“Where’s the details?” asked Mike, “and make it quick.”



“Inside jacket pocket,” croaked Sills tremulously.
Mike’s companion passed his hand dexterously into the indicated pocket

and flicked out three or four folded sheets of foolscap.
“Dat it, Mike?”



A hasty appraisal and a nod, “Yeh, we got it.
All right.
Baldy, on your

way!” A sudden shove and the two gangsters jumped into their car and

drove away rapidly, while the chemist sprawled on the sidewalk.
Kindly

hands raised him up.
“It’s all right,” he managed to gasp.
“I just tripped, that’s all.
I’m

not hurt.” He found himself alone again, passed into the bank, and

dropped into the nearest bench, in near-collapse.
There was no doubt

about it; the new life was not for him.
But he should have been prepared for it.
Taylor had foreseen a

possibility of this sort of thing happening.
He, himself, had thought a

car had been trailing him.
Yet, in his surprise and fright, he had

almost ruined everything.
He shrugged his thin shoulders and, taking off his hat, abstracted a

few folded sheets of paper from the sweatband.
It was the work of five

minutes to deposit them in a vault, and see the immensely strong steel

door swing shut.
He felt relieved.
“I wonder what they’ll do,” he muttered to himself on the way home,

“when they try to follow the instructions on the paper they _did_ get.”

He pursed his lips and shook his head.
“If they do, there’s going to be

one heck of an explosion.”



Sills arrived home to find three policemen pacing leisurely up and down

the sidewalk in front of the house.
“Police guard,” explained Taylor shortly, “so that we have no more

trouble like last night.”



The chemist related the events at the bank and Taylor nodded grimly.
“Well, it’s checkmate for them now.
Staples will be here in two hours

and until then, the police will take care of things.
Afterwards,” he

shrugged, “it will be Staples’ affair.”



“Listen, Gene,” the chemist put in suddenly, “I’m worried about the

ammonium.
I haven’t tested its plating abilities and those are the most

important things, you know.
What if Staples comes, and we find that all

we have is pigeon milk.”



“Hmm,” Taylor stroked his chin, “you’re right there.
But I’ll tell you

what we can do.
Before Staples comes, let’s plate something--a spoon,

suppose--for our own satisfaction.”



“It’s really very annoying,” Sills complained fretfully.
“If it weren’t

for these troublesome hooligans, we wouldn’t have to proceed in this

slipshod and unscientific manner.”



“Well, let’s eat dinner first.”



                 *       *       *       *       *



After the mid-day meal, they began.
The apparatus was set up in

feverish haste.
In a cubic vat, a foot each way, a saturated solution

of Ammonaline was poured.
An old, battered spoon was the cathode and a

mass of ammonium amalgam (separated from the rest of the solution by a

perforated glass partition) was the anode.
Three batteries in series

provided the current.
Sills explained animatedly, “It works on the same principle as ordinary

copper plating.
The ammonium ion, once the electric current is run

through, is attracted to the cathode, which is the spoon.
Ordinarily it

would break up, being unstable, but this is not the case when it is

dissolved in Ammonaline.
This Ammonaline is itself very slightly

ionized and oxygen is given off at the anode.
“This much I know from theory.
Let us see what happens in practice.”



He closed the key while Taylor watched with breathless interest.
For a

moment, no effect was visible.
Taylor looked disappointed.
Then Sills grasped his sleeve.
“See!” he hissed.
“Watch the anode!”



Sure enough, bubbles of gas were slowly forming upon the spongy

ammonium amalgam.
They shifted their attention to the spoon.
Gradually, they noticed a change.
The metallic appearance became

dulled, the silver color slowly losing its whiteness.
A layer of

distinct, if dull, yellow was being built up.
For fifteen minutes, the

current ran and then Sills broke the circuit with a contented sigh.
“It plates perfectly,” he said.
“Good!
Take it out!
Let’s see it!”



“What?” Sills was aghast.
“Take it out!
Why, that’s pure ammonium.
If I

were to expose it to ordinary air, the water vapor would dissolve it to

NH₄OH in no time.
We can’t do that.”



He dragged a rather bulky piece of apparatus to the table.
“This,” he

said, “is a compressed-air container.
I run it through calcium chloride

dryers and then bubble the perfectly dry oxygen (safely diluted with

four times its own volume of nitrogen) directly into the solvent.”



He introduced the nozzle into the solution just beneath the spoon and

turned on a slow stream of air.
It worked like magic.
With almost

lightning speed, the yellow coating began to glitter and gleam, to

shine with almost ethereal beauty.
The two men watched it with beating heart and panting breath.
Sills

shut the air off, and for a while they watched the wonderful spoon and

said nothing.
Then Taylor whispered hoarsely, “Take it out.
Let me feel it!
My

God!--it’s beautiful!”



With reverent awe, Sills approached the spoon, grasped it with forceps,

and withdrew it from the surrounding liquid.
What followed immediately after that can never be fully described.
Later on, when excited newspaper reporters pressed them unmercifully,

neither Taylor nor Sills had the least recollection of the happenings

of the next few minutes.
What happened was that the moment the ammonium-plated spoon was exposed

to open air, the most horrible odor ever conceived assailed their

nostrils!--an odor that cannot be described, a terrible broth of Hell

that plunged the room into sheer, horrible nightmare.
With one strangled gasp, Sills dropped the spoon.
Both were coughing

and retching, tearing wildly at their throats and mouths, yelling,

weeping, sneezing!
Taylor pounced upon the spoon and looked about wildly.
The odor grew

steadily more powerful and their wild exertions to escape it had

already succeeded in wrecking the laboratory and had upset the vat of

Ammonaline.
There was only one thing to do, and Sills did it.
The spoon

went flying out the open window into the middle of Twelfth Avenue.
It

hit the sidewalk right at the feet of one of the policemen, but Taylor

didn’t care.
“Take off your clothes.
We’ll have to burn them,” Sills was gasping.
“Then spray something over the laboratory--anything with a strong

smell.
Burn sulphur.
Get some liquid bromine.”



                 *       *       *       *       *



Both were tearing at their clothes in distraction when they realized

that someone had walked in through the unlocked door.
The bell had

rung, but neither had heard it.
It was Staples, six-foot, lion-maned

Steel King.
One step into the hall ruined his dignity utterly.
He collapsed in one

tearing sob and Twelfth Avenue was treated to the spectacle of an

elderly, richly-dressed gentleman tearing uptown as fast as his feet

would carry him, shedding as much of his clothes as he dared while

doing so.
The spoon continued its deadly work.
The three policemen had long since

retired in abject rout, and now to the numbed and tortured senses of

the two innocent and suffering causes of the entire mess came a roaring

and confused shouting from the street.
Men and women were pouring out of the neighboring houses, horses were

bolting.
Fire engines clanged down the street, only to be abandoned by

their riders.
Squadrons of police came--and left.
Sills and Taylor finally gave up, and clad only in trousers, ran

pell-mell for the Hudson.
They did not stop until they found themselves

neck-deep in water, with blessed, pure air above them.
Taylor turned bewildered eyes to Sills.
“But how could it emit that

horrible odor?
You said it was stable and stable solids have no odors.
It takes vapor for that, doesn’t it?”



“Have you ever smelled musk?” groaned Sills.
“It will give off an aroma

for an indefinite period without losing any appreciable weight.
We’ve

come up against something like that.”



The two ruminated in silence for a while, wincing whenever the wind

brought a vagrant waft of ammonium vapor to them, and then Taylor said

in a low voice, “When they finally trace the trouble to the spoon, and

find out who made it, I’m afraid we’ll be sued--or maybe thrown in

jail.”



Sills’ face lengthened.
“I wish I’d never seen the damned stuff!
It’s

brought nothing but trouble.” His tortured spirit gave way and he

sobbed loudly.
Taylor patted him on the back mournfully.
“It’s not as bad as all that,

of course.
The discovery will make you famous and you’ll be able to

demand your own price, working at any industrial lab in the country.
Then, too, you’re a cinch to win the Nobel Prize.”



“That’s right,” Sills smiled again, “and I may find a way to counteract

the odor, too.
I hope so.”



“I hope so, too,” said Taylor feelingly.
“Let’s go back.
I think

they’ve managed to remove the spoon by now.”



[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the July 1940 issue of

_Future Fiction_ magazine.]
Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net



















YOUTH



_by_ ISAAC ASIMOV





    Red and Slim found the two strange little animals the morning after

    they heard the thunder sounds.
They knew that they could never show

    their new pets to their parents.
[Illustration]





There was a spatter of pebbles against the window and the youngster

stirred in his sleep.
Another, and he was awake.
He sat up stiffly in bed.
Seconds passed while he interpreted his

strange surroundings.
He wasn't in his own home, of course.
This was out

in the country.
It was colder than it should be and there was green at

the window.
"Slim!"
The call was a hoarse, urgent whisper, and the youngster bounded to the

open window.
Slim wasn't his real name, but the new friend he had met the day before

had needed only one look at his slight figure to say, "You're Slim."
He

added, "I'm Red."
Red wasn't his real name, either, but its appropriateness was obvious.
They were friends instantly with the quick unquestioning friendship of

young ones not yet quite in adolescence, before even the first stains of

adulthood began to make their appearance.
Slim cried, "Hi, Red!"
and waved cheerfully, still blinking the sleep

out of himself.
Red kept to his croaking whisper, "Quiet!
You want to wake somebody?"
Slim noticed all at once that the sun scarcely topped the low hills in

the east, that the shadows were long and soft, and that the grass was

wet.
Slim said, more softly, "What's the matter?"
Red only waved for him to come out.
Slim dressed quickly, gladly confining his morning wash to the momentary

sprinkle of a little lukewarm water.
He let the air dry the exposed

portions of his body as he ran out, while bare skin grew wet against the

dewy grass.
Red said, "You've got to be quiet.
If Mom wakes up or Dad or your Dad or

even any of the hands then it'll be 'Come on in or you'll catch your

death of cold.'"
He mimicked voice and tone faithfully, so that Slim laughed and thought

that there had never been so funny a fellow as Red.
Slim said, eagerly, "Do you come out here every day like this, Red?
Real

early?
It's like the whole world is just yours, isn't it, Red?
No one

else around and all like that."
He felt proud at being allowed entrance

into this private world.
Red stared at him sidelong.
He said carelessly, "I've been up for hours.
Didn't you hear it last night?"
"Hear what?"
"Thunder."
"Was there a thunderstorm?"
Slim never slept through a thunderstorm.
"I guess not.
But there was thunder.
I heard it, and then I went to the

window and it wasn't raining.
It was all stars and the sky was just

getting sort of almost gray.
You know what I mean?"
Slim had never seen it so, but he nodded.
"So I just thought I'd go out," said Red.
They walked along the grassy side of the concrete road that split the

panorama right down the middle all the way down to where it vanished

among the hills.
It was so old that Red's father couldn't tell Red when

it had been built.
It didn't have a crack or a rough spot in it.
Red said, "Can you keep a secret?"
"Sure, Red.
What kind of a secret?"
"Just a secret.
Maybe I'll tell you and maybe I won't.
I don't know

yet."
Red broke a long, supple stem from a fern they passed,

methodically stripped it of its leaflets and swung what was left

whip-fashion.
For a moment, he was on a wild charger, which reared and

champed under his iron control.
Then he got tired, tossed the whip aside

and stowed the charger away in a corner of his imagination for future

use.
He said, "There'll be a circus around."
Slim said, "That's no secret.
I knew that.
My Dad told me even before we

came here--"



"That's not the secret.
Fine secret!
Ever see a circus?"
"Oh, sure.
You bet."
"Like it?"
"Say, there isn't anything I like better."
Red was watching out of the corner of his eyes again.
"Ever think you

would like to be with a circus?
I mean, for good?"
Slim considered, "I guess not.
I think I'll be an astronomer like my

Dad.
I think he wants me to be."
"Huh!
Astronomer!"
said Red.
Slim felt the doors of the new, private world closing on him and

astronomy became a thing of dead stars and black, empty space.
He said, placatingly, "A circus _would_ be more fun."
"You're just saying that."
"No, I'm not.
I mean it."
Red grew argumentative.
"Suppose you had a chance to join the circus

right now.
What would you do?"
"I--I--"



"See!"
Red affected scornful laughter.
Slim was stung.
"I'd join up."
"Go on."
"Try me."
Red whirled at him, strange and intense.
"You meant that?
You want to go

in with me?"
[Illustration]



"What do you mean?"
Slim stepped back a bit, surprised by the unexpected

challenge.
"I got something that can get us into the circus.
Maybe someday we can

even have a circus of our own.
We could be the biggest circus-fellows in

the world.
That's if you want to go in with me.
Otherwise--Well, I guess

I can do it on my own.
I just thought: Let's give good old Slim a

chance."
The world was strange and glamorous, and Slim said, "Sure thing, Red.
I'm in!
What is it, huh, Red?
Tell me what it is."
"Figure it out.
What's the most important thing in circuses?"
Slim thought desperately.
He wanted to give the right answer.
Finally,

he said, "Acrobats?"
"Holy Smokes!
I wouldn't go five steps to look at acrobats."
"I don't know then."
"Animals, that's what!
What's the best side-show?
Where are the biggest

crowds?
Even in the main rings the best acts are animal acts."
There was

no doubt in Red's voice.
"Do you think so?"
"Everyone thinks so.
You ask anyone.
Anyway, I found animals this

morning.
Two of them."
"And you've got them?"
"Sure.
That's the secret.
Are you telling?"
"Of course not."
"Okay.
I've got them in the barn.
Do you want to see them?"
They were almost at the barn; its huge open door black.
Too black.
They

had been heading there all the time.
Slim stopped in his tracks.
He tried to make his words casual.
"Are they big?"
"Would I fool with them if they were big?
They can't hurt you.
They're

only about so long.
I've got them in a cage."
They were in the barn now and Slim saw the large cage suspended from a

hook in the roof.
It was covered with stiff canvas.
Red said, "We used to have some bird there or something.
Anyway, they

can't get away from there.
Come on, let's go up to the loft."
They clambered up the wooden stairs and Red hooked the cage toward them.
Slim pointed and said, "There's sort of a hole in the canvas."
Red frowned.
"How'd that get there?"
He lifted the canvas, looked in,

and said, with relief, "They're still there."
"The canvas appeared to be burned," worried Slim.
"You want to look, or don't you?"
Slim nodded slowly.
He wasn't sure he wanted to, after all.
They might

be--



But the canvas had been jerked off and there they were.
Two of them, the

way Red said.
They were small, and sort of disgusting-looking.
The

animals moved quickly as the canvas lifted and were on the side toward

the youngsters.
Red poked a cautious finger at them.
"Watch out," said Slim, in agony.
"They don't hurt you," said Red.
"Ever see anything like them?"
"No."
"Can't you see how a circus would jump at a chance to have these?"
"Maybe they're too small for a circus."
Red looked annoyed.
He let go the cage which swung back and forth

pendulum-fashion.
"You're just trying to back out, aren't you?"
"No, I'm not.
It's just--"



"They're not too small, don't worry.
Right now, I've only got one

worry."
"What's that?"
"Well, I've got to keep them till the circus comes, don't I?
I've got

to figure out what to feed them meanwhile."
The cage swung and the little trapped creatures clung to its bars,

gesturing at the youngsters with queer, quick motions--almost as though

they were intelligent.
II



The Astronomer entered the dining room with decorum.
He felt very much

the guest.
He said, "Where are the youngsters?
My son isn't in his room."
The Industrialist smiled.
"They've been out for hours.
However,

breakfast was forced into them among the women some time ago, so there

is nothing to worry about.
Youth, Doctor, youth!"
"Youth!"
The word seemed to depress the Astronomer.
They ate breakfast in silence.
The Industrialist said once, "You really

think they'll come.
The day looks so--_normal_."
The Astronomer said, "They'll come."
That was all.
Afterward the Industrialist said, "You'll pardon me.
I can't conceive

your playing so elaborate a hoax.
You really spoke to them?"
"As I speak to you.
At least, in a sense.
They can project thoughts."
"I gathered that must be so from your letter.
How, I wonder."
"I could not say.
I asked them and, of course, they were vague.
Or

perhaps it was just that I could not understand.
It involves a projector

for the focussing of thought and, even more than that, conscious

attention on the part of both projector and receptor.
It was quite a

while before I realized they were trying to think at me.
Such

thought-projectors may be part of the science they will give us."
"Perhaps," said the Industrialist.
"Yet think of the changes it would

bring to society.
A thought-projector!"
"Why not?
Change would be good for us."
"I don't think so."
"It is only in old age that change is unwelcome," said the Astronomer,

"and races can be old as well as individuals."
The Industrialist pointed out the window.
"You see that road.
It was

built Beforethewars.
I don't know exactly when.
It is as good now as the

day it was built.
We couldn't possibly duplicate it now.
The race was

young when that was built, eh?"
"Then?
Yes!
At least they weren't afraid of new things."
"No.
I wish they had been.
Where is the society of Beforethewars?
Destroyed, Doctor!
What good were youth and new things?
We are better

off now.
The world is peaceful and jogs along.
The race goes nowhere but

after all, there is nowhere to go.
_They_ proved that.
The men who built

the road.
I will speak with your visitors as I agreed, if they come.
But

I think I will only ask them to go."
"The race is not going nowhere," said the Astronomer, earnestly.
"It is

going toward final destruction.
My university has a smaller student body

each year.
Fewer books are written.
Less work is done.
An old man sleeps

in the sun and his days are peaceful and unchanging, but each day finds

him nearer death all the same."
"Well, well," said the Industrialist.
"No, don't dismiss it.
Listen.
Before I wrote you, I investigated your

position in the planetary economy."
"And you found me solvent?"
interrupted the Industrialist, smiling.
"Why, yes.
Oh, I see, you are joking.
And yet--perhaps the joke is not

far off.
You are less solvent than your father and he was less solvent

than his father.
Perhaps your son will no longer be solvent.
It becomes

too troublesome for the planet to support even the industries that still

exist, though they are toothpicks to the oak trees of Beforethewars.
We

will be back to village economy and then to what?
The caves?"
"And the infusion of fresh technological knowledge will be the changing

of all that?"
"Not just the new knowledge.
Rather the whole effect of change, of a

broadening of horizons.
Look, sir, I chose you to approach in this

matter not only because you were rich and influential with government

officials, but because you had an unusual reputation, for these days, of

daring to break with tradition.
Our people will resist change and you

would know how to handle them, how to see to it that--that--"



"That the youth of the race is revived?"
"Yes."
"With its atomic bombs?"
"The atomic bombs," returned the Astronomer, "need not be the end of

civilization.
These visitors of mine had their atomic bomb, or whatever

their equivalent was on their own worlds, and survived it, because they

didn't give up.
Don't you see?
It wasn't the bomb that defeated us, but

our own shell shock.
This may be the last chance to reverse the

process."
[Illustration]



"Tell me," said the Industrialist, "what do these friends from space

want in return?"
The Astronomer hesitated.
He said, "I will be truthful with you.
They

come from a denser planet.
Ours is richer in the lighter atoms."
"They want magnesium?
Aluminum?"
"No, sir.
Carbon and hydrogen.
They want coal and oil."
"Really?"
The Astronomer said, quickly, "You are going to ask why creatures who

have mastered space travel, and therefore atomic power, would want coal

and oil.
I can't answer that."
The Industrialist smiled.
"But I can.
This is the best evidence yet of

the truth of your story.
Superficially, atomic power would seem to

preclude the use of coal and oil.
However, quite apart from the energy

gained by their combustion they remain, and always will remain, the

basic raw material for all organic chemistry.
Plastics, dyes,

pharmaceuticals, solvents.
Industry could not exist without them, even

in an atomic age.
Still, if coal and oil are the low price for which

they would sell us the troubles and tortures of racial youth, my answer

is that the commodity would be dear if offered gratis."
The Astronomer sighed and said, "There are the boys!"
They were visible through the open window, standing together in the

grassy field and lost in animated conversation.
The Industrialist's son

pointed imperiously and the Astronomer's son nodded and made off at a

run toward the house.
The Industrialist said, "There is the Youth you speak of.
Our race has

as much of it as it ever had."
"Yes, but we age them quickly and pour them into the mold."
Slim scuttled into the room, the door banging behind him.
The Astronomer said, in mild disapproval, "What's this?"
Slim looked up in surprise and came to a halt.
"I beg your pardon.
I

didn't know anyone was here.
I am sorry to have interrupted."
His

enunciation was almost painfully precise.
The Industrialist said, "It's all right, youngster."
But the Astronomer said, "Even if you had been entering an empty room,

son, there would be no cause for slamming a door."
"Nonsense," insisted the Industrialist.
"The youngster has done no harm.
You simply scold him for being young.
You, with your views!"
He said to Slim, "Come here, lad."
Slim advanced slowly.
"How do you like the country, eh?"
"Very much, sir, thank you."
"My son has been showing you about the place, has he?"
"Yes, sir.
Red--I mean--"



"No, no.
Call him Red.
I call him that myself.
Now tell me, what are you

two up to, eh?"
Slim looked away.
"Why--just exploring, sir."
The Industrialist turned to the Astronomer.
"There you are, youthful

curiosity and adventure-lust.
The race has not yet lost it."
Slim said, "Sir?"
"Yes, lad."
The youngster took a long time in getting on with it.
He said, "Red sent

me in for something good to eat, but I don't exactly know what he meant.
I didn't like to say so."
"Why, just ask cook.
She'll have something good for young'uns to eat."
"Oh, no, sir.
I mean for animals."
"For animals?"
"Yes, sir.
What do animals eat?"
The Astronomer said, "I am afraid my son is city-bred."
"Well," said the Industrialist, "there's no harm in that.
What kind of

an animal, lad?"
"A small one, sir."
"Then try grass or leaves, and if they don't want that, nuts or berries

would probably do the trick."
"Thank you, sir."
Slim ran out again, closing the door gently behind

him.
The Astronomer said, "Do you suppose they've trapped an animal alive?"
He was obviously perturbed.
"That's common enough.
There's no shooting on my estate and it's tame

country, full of rodents and small creatures.
Red is always coming home

with pets of one sort or another.
They rarely maintain his interest for

long."
He looked at the wall clock.
"Your friends should have been here by now,

shouldn't they?"
III



The swaying had come to a halt and it was dark.
The Explorer was not

comfortable in the alien air.
It felt as thick as soup and he had to

breathe shallowly.
Even so--



He reached out in a sudden need for company.
The Merchant was warm to

the touch.
His breathing was rough, he moved in an occasional spasm, and

was obviously asleep.
The Explorer hesitated and decided not to wake

him.
It would serve no real purpose.
There would be no rescue, of course.
That was the penalty paid for the

high profits which unrestrained competition could lead to.
The Merchant

who opened a new planet could have a ten year monopoly of its trade,

which he might hug to himself or, more likely, rent out to all comers at

a stiff price.
It followed that planets were searched for in secrecy

and, preferably, away from the usual trade routes.
In a case such as

theirs, then, there was little or no chance that another ship would come

within range of their subetherics except for the most improbable of

coincidences.
Even if they were in their ship, that is, rather than in

this--this--_cage_.
The Explorer grasped the thick bars.
Even if they blasted those away, as

they could, they would be stuck too high in open air for leaping.
It was too bad.
They had landed twice before in the scout-ship.
They had

established contact with the natives who were grotesquely huge, but mild

and unaggressive.
It was obvious that they had once owned a flourishing

technology, but hadn't faced up to the consequences of such a

technology.
It would have been a wonderful market.
And it was a tremendous world.
The Merchant, especially, had been taken

aback.
He had known the figures that expressed the planet's diameter,

but from a distance of two light-seconds, he had stood at the visi-plate

and muttered, "Unbelievable!"
"Oh, there are larger worlds," the Explorer said.
It wouldn't do for an

Explorer to be too easily impressed.
"Inhabited?"
"Well, no."
"Why, you could drop your planet into that large ocean and drown it."
The Explorer smiled.
It was a gentle dig at his Arcturian homeland,

which was smaller than most planets.
He said, "Not quite."
The Merchant followed along the line of his thoughts.
"And the

inhabitants are large in proportion to their world?"
He sounded as

though the news struck him less favorably now.
"Nearly ten times our height."
"Are you sure they are friendly?"
"That is hard to say.
Friendship between alien intelligences is an

imponderable.
They are not dangerous, I think.
We've come across other

groups that could not maintain equilibrium after the atomic war stage

and you know the results.
Introversion.
Retreat.
Gradual decadence and

increasing gentleness."
"Even if they are such monsters?"
"The principle remains."
It was about then that the Explorer felt the heavy throbbing of the

engines.
He frowned and said, "We are descending a bit too quickly."
There had been some speculation on the dangers of landing some hours

before.
The planetary target was a huge one for an oxygen-water world.
Though it lacked the size of the uninhabitable hydrogen-ammonia planets

and its low density made its surface gravity fairly normal, its

gravitational forces fell off but slowly with distance.
In short, its

gravitational potential was high and the ship's Calculator was a

run-of-the-mill model not designed to plot landing trajectories at that

potential range.
That meant the Pilot would have to use manual controls.
It would have been wiser to install a more high-powered model, but that

would have meant a trip to some outpost of civilization; lost time;

perhaps a lost secret.
The Merchant demanded an immediate landing.
The Merchant felt it necessary to defend his position now.
He said

angrily to the Explorer, "Don't you think the Pilot knows his job?
He

landed you safely twice before."
Yes, thought the Explorer, in a scout-ship, not in this unmaneuverable

freighter.
Aloud, he said nothing.
He kept his eye on the visi-plate.
They were descending too quickly.
There was no room for doubt.
Much too quickly.
The Merchant said, peevishly, "Why do you keep silence?"
"Well, then, if you wish me to speak, I would suggest that you strap on

your Floater and help me prepare the Ejector."
The Pilot fought a noble fight.
He was no beginner.
The atmosphere,

abnormally high and thick in the gravitational potential of this world

whipped and burned about the ship, but to the very last it looked as

though he might bring it under control despite that.
He even maintained course, following the extrapolated line to the point

on the northern continent toward which they were headed.
Under other

circumstances, with a shade more luck, the story would eventually have

been told and retold as a heroic and masterly reversal of a lost

situation.
But within sight of victory, tired body and tired nerves

clamped a control bar with a shade too much pressure.
The ship, which

had almost levelled off, dipped down again.
There was no room to retrieve the final error.
There was only a mile

left to fall.
The Pilot remained at his post to the actual landing, his

only thought that of breaking the force of the crash, of maintaining the

spaceworthiness of the vessel.
He did not survive.
With the ship bucking

madly in a soupy atmosphere, few Ejectors could be mobilized and only

one of them in time.
When afterwards, the Explorer lifted out of unconsciousness and rose

to his feet, he had the definite feeling that but for himself and

the Merchant, there were no survivors.
And perhaps that was an

over-calculation.
His Floater had burnt out while still sufficiently

distant from surface to have the fall stun him.
The Merchant might have

had less luck, even, than that.
He was surrounded by a world of thick, ropy stalks of grass, and in the

distance were trees that reminded him vaguely of similar structures on

his native Arcturian world except that their lowest branches were high

above what he would consider normal tree-tops.
He called, his voice sounding basso in the thick air and the Merchant

answered.
The Explorer made his way toward him, thrusting violently at

the coarse stalks that barred his path.
"Are you hurt?"
he asked.
The Merchant grimaced.
"I've sprained something.
It hurts to walk."
The Explorer probed gently.
"I don't think anything is broken.
You'll

have to walk despite the pain."
"Can't we rest first?"
"It's important to try to find the ship.
If it is spaceworthy or if it

can be repaired, we may live.
Otherwise, we won't."
"Just a few minutes.
Let me catch my breath."
The Explorer was glad enough for those few minutes.
The Merchant's eyes

were already closed.
He allowed his to do the same.
He heard the trampling and his eyes snapped open.
Never sleep on a

strange planet, he told himself futilely.
The Merchant was awake too and his steady screaming was a rumble of

terror.
The Explorer called, "It's only a native of this planet.
It won't harm

you."
But even as he spoke, the giant had swooped down and in a moment they

were in its grasp being lifted closer to its monstrous ugliness.
The Merchant struggled violently and, of course, quite futilely.
"Can't

you talk to it?"
he yelled.
The Explorer could only shake his head.
"I can't reach it with the

Projector.
It won't be listening."
"Then blast it.
Blast it down."
"We can't do that."
The phrase "you fool" had almost been added.
The

Explorer struggled to keep his self-control.
They were swallowing space

as the monster moved purposefully away.
"Why not?"
cried the Merchant.
"You can reach your blaster.
I see it in

plain sight.
Don't be afraid of falling."
"It's simpler than that.
If this monster is killed, you'll never trade

with this planet.
You'll never even leave it.
You probably won't live

the day out."
"Why?
Why?"
"Because this is one of the young of the species.
You should know what

happens when a trader kills a native young, even accidentally.
What's

more, if this is the target-point, then we are on the estate of a

powerful native.
This might be one of his brood."
That was how they entered their present prison.
They had carefully burnt

away a portion of the thick, stiff covering and it was obvious that the

height from which they were suspended was a killing one.
Now, once again, the prison-cage shuddered and lifted in an upward arc.
The Merchant rolled to the lower rim and startled awake.
The cover

lifted and light flooded in.
As was the case the time before, there were

two specimens of the young.
They were not very different in appearance

from adults of the species, reflected the Explorer, though, of course,

they were considerably smaller.
A handful of reedy green stalks was stuffed between the bars.
Its odor

was not unpleasant but it carried clods of soil at its ends.
The Merchant drew away and said, huskily, "What are they doing?"
The Explorer said, "Trying to feed us, I should judge.
At least this

seems to be the native equivalent of grass."
The cover was replaced and they were set swinging again, alone with

their fodder.
IV



Slim started at the sound of footsteps and brightened when it turned out

to be only Red.
He said, "No one's around.
I had my eye peeled, you bet."
Red said, "Ssh.
Look.
You take this stuff and stick it in the cage.
I've

got to scoot back to the house."
"What is it?"
Slim reached reluctantly.
"Ground meat.
Holy Smokes, haven't you ever seen ground meat?
That's

what you should've got when I sent you to the house instead of coming

back with that stupid grass."
Slim was hurt.
"How'd I know they don't eat grass.
Besides, ground meat

doesn't come loose like that.
It comes in cellophane and it isn't that

color."
"Sure--in the city.
Out here we grind our own and it's always this color

till it's cooked."
"You mean it isn't cooked?"
Slim drew away quickly.
Red looked disgusted.
"Do you think animals eat _cooked_ food.
Come on,

take it.
It won't hurt you.
I tell you there isn't much time."
"Why?
What's doing back at the house?"
"I don't know.
Dad and your father are walking around.
I think maybe

they're looking for me.
Maybe the cook told them I took the meat.
Anyway, we don't want them coming here after me."
"Didn't you ask the cook before you took this stuff?"
"Who?
That crab?
Shouldn't wonder if she only let me have a drink of

water because Dad makes her.
Come on.
Take it."
Slim took the large glob of meat though his skin crawled at the touch.
He turned toward the barn and Red sped away in the direction from which

he had come.
He slowed when he approached the two adults, took a few deep breaths to

bring himself back to normal, and then carefully and nonchalantly

sauntered past.
(They were walking in the general direction of the barn,

he noticed, but not dead on.)
He said, "Hi, Dad.
Hello, sir."
The Industrialist said, "Just a moment, Red.
I have a question to ask

you?"
Red turned a carefully blank face to his father.
"Yes, Dad?"
"Mother tells me you were out early this morning."
"Not real early, Dad.
Just a little before breakfast."
"She said you told her it was because you had been awakened during the

night and didn't go back to sleep."
Red waited before answering.
Should he have told Mom that?
Then he said, "Yes, sir."
"What was it that awakened you?"
Red saw no harm in it.
He said, "I don't know, Dad.
It sounded like

thunder, sort of, and like a collision, sort of."
"Could you tell where it came from?"
"It _sounded_ like it was out by the hill."
That was truthful, and

useful as well, since the direction was almost opposite that in which

the barn lay.
The Industrialist looked at his guest.
"I suppose it would do no harm to

walk toward the hill."
The Astronomer said, "I am ready."
Red watched them walk away and when he turned he saw Slim peering

cautiously out from among the briars of a hedge.
Red waved at him.
"Come on."
Slim stepped out and approached.
"Did they say anything about the meat?"
"No.
I guess they don't know about that.
They went down to the hill."
"What for?"
"Search me.
They kept asking about the noise I heard.
Listen, did the

animals eat the meat?"
"Well," said Slim, cautiously, "they were sort of _looking_ at it and

smelling it or something."
"Okay," Red said, "I guess they'll eat it.
Holy Smokes, they've got to

eat _something_.
Let's walk along toward the hill and see what Dad and

your father are going to do."
"What about the animals?"
"They'll be all right.
A fellow can't spend all his time on them.
Did

you give them water?"
"Sure.
They drank that."
"See.
Come on.
We'll look at them after lunch.
I tell you what.
We'll

bring them fruit.
Anything'll eat fruit."
Together they trotted up the rise, Red, as usual, in the lead.
V



The Astronomer said, "You think the noise was their ship landing?"
"Don't you think it could be?"
"If it were, they may all be dead."
"Perhaps not."
The Industrialist frowned.
"If they have landed, and are still alive, where are they?"
"Think about that for a while."
He was still frowning.
The Astronomer said, "I don't understand you."
"They may not be friendly."
"Oh, no.
I've spoken with them.
They've--"



"You've spoken with them.
Call that reconnaissance.
What would their

next step be?
Invasion?"
"But they only have one ship, sir."
"You know that only because they say so.
They might have a fleet."
"I've told you about their size.
They--"



"Their size would not matter, if they have handweapons that may well be

superior to our artillery."
"That is not what I meant."
"I had this partly in mind from the first."
The Industrialist went on.
"It is for that reason I agreed to see them after I received your

letter.
Not to agree to an unsettling and impossible trade, but to judge

their real purposes.
I did not count on their evading the meeting."
He sighed.
"I suppose it isn't our fault.
You are right in one thing, at

any rate.
The world has been at peace too long.
We are losing a healthy

sense of suspicion."
The Astronomer's mild voice rose to an unusual pitch and he said, "I

_will_ speak.
I tell you that there is no reason to suppose they can

possibly be hostile.
They are small, yes, but that is only important

because it is a reflection of the fact that their native worlds are

small.
Our world has what is for them a normal gravity, but because of

our much higher gravitational potential, our atmosphere is too dense to

support them comfortably over sustained periods.
For a similar reason

the use of the world as a base for interstellar travel, except for trade

in certain items, is uneconomical.
And there are important differences

in chemistry of life due to the basic differences in soils.
They

couldn't eat our food or we theirs."
"Surely all this can be overcome.
They can bring their own food, build

domed stations of lowered air pressure, devise specially designed

ships."
"They can.
And how glibly you can describe feats that are easy to a race

in its youth.
It is simply that they don't have to do any of that.
There

are millions of worlds suitable for them in the Galaxy.
They don't need

this one which isn't."
"How do you know?
All this is their information again."
"This I was able to check independently.
I am an astronomer, after all."
"That is true.
Let me hear what you have to say then, while we walk."
"Then, sir, consider that for a long time our astronomers have believed

that two general classes of planetary bodies existed.
First, the planets

which formed at distances far enough from their stellar nucleus to

become cool enough to capture hydrogen.
These would be large planets

rich in hydrogen, ammonia and methane.
We have examples of these in the

giant outer planets.
The second class would include those planets formed

so near the stellar center that the high temperature would make it

impossible to capture much hydrogen.
These would be smaller planets,

comparatively poorer in hydrogen and richer in oxygen.
We know that type

very well since we live on one.
Ours is the only solar system we know in

detail, however, and it has been reasonable for us to assume that these

were the _only_ two planetary classes."
"I take it then that there is another."
"Yes.
There is a super-dense class, still smaller, poorer in hydrogen,

than the inner planets of the solar system.
The ratio of occurrence of

hydrogen-ammonia planets and these super-dense water-oxygen worlds of

theirs over the entire Galaxy--and remember that they have actually

conducted a survey of significant sample volumes of the Galaxy which we,

without interstellar travel, cannot do--is about 3 to 1.
This leaves

them seven million super-dense worlds for exploration and colonization."
The Industrialist looked at the blue sky and the green-covered trees

among which they were making their way.
He said, "And worlds like ours?"
The Astronomer said, softly, "Ours is the first solar system they have

found which contains them.
Apparently the development of our solar

system was unique and did not follow the ordinary rules."
The Industrialist considered that.
"What it amounts to is that these

creatures from space are asteroid-dwellers."
"No, no.
The asteroids are something else again.
They occur, I was told,

in one out of eight stellar systems, but they're completely different

from what we've been discussing."
"And how does your being an astronomer change the fact that you are

still only quoting their unsupported statements?"
"But they did not restrict themselves to bald items of information.
They

presented me with a theory of stellar evolution which I had to accept

and which is more nearly valid than anything our own astronomy has ever

been able to devise, if we except possible lost theories dating from

Beforethewars.
Mind you, their theory had a rigidly mathematical

development and it predicted just such a Galaxy as they describe.
So you

see, they have all the worlds they wish.
They are not land-hungry.
Certainly not for our land."
"Reason would say so, if what you say is true.
But creatures may be

intelligent and not reasonable.
Our forefathers were presumably

intelligent, yet they were certainly not reasonable.
Was it reasonable

to destroy almost all their tremendous civilization in atomic warfare

over causes our historians can no longer accurately determine?"
The

Industrialist brooded over it.
"From the dropping of the first atom bomb

over those islands--I forget the ancient name--there was only one end in

sight, and in plain sight.
Yet events were allowed to proceed to that

end."
He looked up, said briskly, "Well, where are we?
I wonder if we are not

on a fool's errand after all."
But the Astronomer was a little in advance and his voice came thickly.
"No fool's errand, sir.
Look there."
VI



Red and Slim had trailed their elders with the experience of youth,

aided by the absorption and anxiety of their fathers.
Their view of the

final object of the search was somewhat obscured by the underbrush

behind which they remained.
Red said, "Holy Smokes.
Look at that.
It's all shiny silver or

something."
But it was Slim who was really excited.
He caught at the other.
"I know

what this is.
It's a space-ship.
That must be why my father came here.
He's one of the biggest astronomers in the world and your father would

have to call him if a space-ship landed on his estate."
"What are you talking about?
Dad didn't even know that thing was there.
He only came here because I told him I heard the thunder from here.
Besides, there isn't any such thing as a space-ship."
"Sure, there is.
Look at it.
See those round things.
They are ports.
And

you can see the rocket tubes."
"How do you know so much?"
Slim was flushed.
He said, "I read about them.
My father has books about

them.
Old books.
From Beforethewars."
"Huh.
Now I know you're making it up.
Books from Beforethewars!"
"My father _has_ to have them.
He teaches at the University.
It's his

job."
His voice had risen and Red had to pull at him.
"You want them to hear

us?"
he whispered indignantly.
"Well, it is, too, a space-ship."
"Look here, Slim, you mean that's a ship from another world."
"It's _got_ to be.
Look at my father going round and round it.
He

wouldn't be so interested if it was anything else."
"Other worlds!
Where are there other worlds?"
"Everywhere.
How about the planets?
They're worlds just like ours, some

of them.
And other stars probably have planets.
There's probably

zillions of planets."
Red felt outweighed and outnumbered.
He muttered, "You're crazy!"
"All right, then.
I'll show you."
"Hey!
Where are you going?"
"Down there.
I'm going to ask my father.
I suppose you'll believe it if

_he_ tells you.
I suppose you'll believe a Professor of Astronomy knows

what--"



He had scrambled upright.
Red said, "Hey.
You don't want them to see us.
We're not supposed to be

here.
Do you want them to start asking questions and find out about our

animals?"
"I don't care.
You said I was crazy."
"Snitcher!
You promised you wouldn't tell."
"I'm _not_ going to tell.
But if they find out themselves, it's your

fault, for starting an argument and saying I was crazy."
"I take it back, then," grumbled Red.
"Well, all right.
You better."
In a way, Slim was disappointed.
He wanted to see the space-ship at

closer quarters.
Still, he could not break his vow of secrecy even in

spirit without at least the excuse of personal insult.
Red said, "It's awfully small for a space-ship."
"Sure, because it's probably a scout-ship."
"I'll bet Dad couldn't even get into the old thing."
So much Slim realized to be true.
It was a weak point in his argument

and he made no answer.
His interest was absorbed by the adults.
Red rose to his feet; an elaborate attitude of boredom all about him.
"Well, I guess we better be going.
There's business to do and I can't

spend all day here looking at some old space-ship or whatever it is.
We've got to take care of the animals if we're going to be circus-folks.
That's the first rule with circus-folks.
They've got to take care of the

animals.
And," he finished virtuously, "that's what I aim to do,

anyway."
Slim said, "What for, Red?
They've got plenty of meat.
Let's watch."
"There's no fun in watching.
Besides Dad and your father are going away

and I guess it's about lunch time."
Red became argumentative.
"Look, Slim, we can't start acting suspicious

or they're going to start investigating.
Holy Smokes, don't you ever

read any detective stories?
When you're trying to work a big deal

without being caught, it's practically the main thing to keep on acting

just like always.
Then they don't suspect anything.
That's the first

law--"



"Oh, all right."
Slim rose resentfully.
At the moment, the circus appeared to him a

rather tawdry and shoddy substitute for the glories of astronomy, and he

wondered how he had come to fall in with Red's silly scheme.
Down the slope they went, Slim, as usual, in the rear.
VII



The Industrialist said, "It's the workmanship that gets me.
I never saw

such construction."
"What good is it now?"
said the Astronomer, bitterly.
"There's nothing

left.
There'll be no second landing.
This ship detected life on our

planet through accident.
Other exploring parties would come no closer

than necessary to establish the fact that there were no super-dense

worlds existing in our solar system."
"Well, there's no quarreling with a crash landing."
"The ship hardly seems damaged.
If only some had survived, the ship

might have been repaired."
"If they had survived, there would be no trade in any case.
They're too

different.
Too disturbing.
In any case--it's over."
They entered the house and the Industrialist greeted his wife calmly.
"Lunch about ready, dear."
"I'm afraid not.
You see--" She looked hesitantly at the Astronomer.
"Is anything wrong?"
asked the Industrialist.
"Why not tell me?
I'm sure

our guest won't mind a little family discussion."
"Pray don't pay any attention whatever to me," muttered the Astronomer.
He moved miserably to the other end of the living room.
The woman said, in low, hurried tones, "Really, dear, cook's that upset.
I've been soothing her for hours and honestly, I don't know why Red

should have done it."
"Done what?"
The Industrialist was more amused than otherwise.
It had

taken the united efforts of himself and his son months to argue his wife

into using the name "Red" rather than the perfectly ridiculous (viewed

youngster fashion) name which was his real one.
She said, "He's taken most of the chopped meat."
"He's eaten it?"
"Well, I hope not.
It was raw."
"Then what would he want it for?"
"I haven't the slightest idea.
I haven't seen him since breakfast.
Meanwhile cook's just furious.
She caught him vanishing out the kitchen

door and there was the bowl of chopped meat just about empty and she was

going to use it for lunch.
Well, you know cook.
She had to change the

lunch menu and that means she won't be worth living with for a week.
You'll just have to speak to Red, dear, and make him promise not to do

things in the kitchen any more.
And it wouldn't hurt to have him

apologize to cook."
"Oh, come.
She works for us.
If we don't complain about a change in

lunch menu, why should she?"
"Because she's the one who has double-work made for her, and she's

talking about quitting.
Good cooks aren't easy to get.
Do you remember

the one before her?"
It was a strong argument.
The Industrialist looked about vaguely.
He said, "I suppose you're

right.
He isn't here, I suppose.
When he comes in, I'll talk to him."
"You'd better start.
Here he comes."
Red walked into the house and said cheerfully, "Time for lunch, I

guess."
He looked from one parent to the other in quick speculation at

their fixed stares and said, "Got to clean up first, though," and made

for the other door.
The Industrialist said, "One moment, son."
"Sir?"
"Where's your little friend?"
Red said, carelessly, "He's around somewhere.
We were just sort of

walking and I looked around and he wasn't there."
This was perfectly

true, and Red felt on safe ground.
"I told him it was lunch time.
I

said, 'I suppose it's about lunch time.'
I said, 'We got to be getting

back to the house.'
And he said, 'Yes.'
And I just went on and then when

I was about at the creek I looked around and--"



The Astronomer interrupted the voluble story, looking up from a

magazine he had been sightlessly rummaging through.
"I wouldn't worry

about my youngster.
He is quite self-reliant.
Don't wait lunch for him."
"Lunch isn't ready in any case, Doctor."
The Industrialist turned once

more to his son.
"And talking about that, son, the reason for it is that

something happened to the ingredients.
Do you have anything to say?"
"Sir?"
"I hate to feel that I have to explain myself more fully.
Why did you

take the chopped meat?"
"The chopped meat?"
"The chopped meat."
He waited patiently.
Red said, "Well, I was sort of--"



"Hungry?"
prompted his father.
"For raw meat?"
"No, sir.
I just sort of needed it."
"For what exactly?"
Red looked miserable and remained silent.
The Astronomer broke in again.
"If you don't mind my putting in a few

words--You'll remember that just after breakfast my son came in to ask

what animals ate."
"Oh, you're right.
How stupid of me to forget.
Look here, Red, did you

take it for an animal pet you've got?"
Red recovered indignant breath.
He said, "You mean Slim came in here and

said I had an animal?
He came in here and said that?
He said I had an

animal?"
"No, he didn't.
He simply asked what animals ate.
That's all.
Now if he

promised he wouldn't tell on you, he didn't.
It's your own foolishness

in trying to take something without permission that gave you away.
That

happened to be stealing.
Now have you an animal?
I ask you a direct

question."
"Yes, sir."
It was a whisper so low as hardly to be heard.
"All right, you'll have to get rid of it.
Do you understand?"
Red's mother intervened.
"Do you mean to say you're keeping a

meat-eating animal, Red?
It might bite you and give you blood-poison."
"They're only small ones," quavered Red.
"They hardly budge if you touch

them."
"They?
How many do you have?"
"Two."
"Where are they?"
The Industrialist touched her arm.
"Don't chivvy the child any further,"

he said, in a low voice.
"If he says he'll get rid of them, he will,

and that's punishment enough."
He dismissed the matter from his mind.
VIII



Lunch was half over when Slim dashed into the dining room.
For a moment,

he stood abashed, and then he said in what was almost hysteria, "I've

got to speak to Red.
I've got to say something."
Red looked up in fright, but the Astronomer said, "I don't think, son,

you're being very polite.
You've kept lunch waiting."
"I'm sorry, Father."
"Oh, don't rate the lad," said the Industrialist's wife.
"He can speak

to Red if he wants to, and there was no damage done to the lunch."
"I've got to speak to Red alone," Slim insisted.
"Now that's enough," said the Astronomer with a kind of gentleness that

was obviously manufactured for the benefit of strangers and which had

beneath it an easily-recognized edge.
"Take your seat."
Slim did so, but he ate only when someone looked directly upon him.
Even

then he was not very successful.
Red caught his eyes.
He made soundless words, "Did the animals get

loose?"
Slim shook his head slightly.
He whispered, "No, it's--"



The Astronomer looked at him hard and Slim faltered to a stop.
With lunch over, Red slipped out of the room, with a microscopic motion

at Slim to follow.
They walked in silence to the creek.
Then Red turned fiercely upon his companion.
"Look here, what's the idea

of telling my Dad we were feeding animals?"
Slim said, "I didn't.
I asked what you feed animals.
That's not the same

as saying we were doing it.
Besides, it's something else, Red."
But Red had not used up his grievances.
"And where did you go anyway?
I

thought you were coming to the house.
They acted like it was my fault

you weren't there."
"But I'm trying to tell you about that, if you'd only shut _up_ a second

and let me talk.
You don't give a fellow a chance."
"Well, go on and tell me if you've got so much to say."
"I'm _trying_ to.
I went back to the space-ship.
The folks weren't there

anymore and I wanted to see what it was like."
"It isn't a space-ship," said Red, sullenly.
He had nothing to lose.
"It is, too.
I looked inside.
You could look through the ports and I

looked inside and they were _dead_."
He looked sick.
"They were dead."
"_Who_ were dead."
Slim screeched, "Animals!
like _our_ animals!
Only they _aren't_

animals.
They're people-things from other planets."
For a moment Red might have been turned to stone.
It didn't occur to him

to disbelieve Slim at this point.
Slim looked too genuinely the bearer

of just such tidings.
He said, finally, "Oh, my."
"Well, what are we going to do?
Golly, will we get a whopping if they

find out?"
He was shivering.
"We better turn them loose," said Red.
"They'll tell on us."
"They can't talk our language.
Not if they're from another planet."
"Yes, they can.
Because I remember my father talking about some stuff

like that to my mother when he didn't know I was in the room.
He was

talking about visitors who could talk with the mind.
Telepathery or

something.
I thought he was making it up."
"Well, Holy Smokes.
I mean--Holy Smokes."
Red looked up.
"I tell you.
My

Dad said to get rid of them.
Let's sort of bury them somewhere or throw

them in the creek."
"He _told_ you to do that."
"He made me say I had animals and then he said, 'Get rid of them.'
I got

to do what he says.
Holy Smokes, he's my Dad."
Some of the panic left Slim's heart.
It was a thoroughly legalistic way

out.
"Well, let's do it right now, then, before they find out.
Oh,

golly, if they find out, will we be in trouble!"
They broke into a run toward the barn, unspeakable visions in their

minds.
IX



It was different, looking at them as though they were "people."
As

animals, they had been interesting; as "people," horrible.
Their eyes,

which were neutral little objects before, now seemed to watch them with

active malevolence.
"They're making noises," said Slim, in a whisper which was barely

audible.
"I guess they're talking or something," said Red.
Funny that those

noises which they had heard before had not had significance earlier.
He

was making no move toward them.
Neither was Slim.
The canvas was off but they were just watching.
The ground meat, Slim

noticed, hadn't been touched.
Slim said, "Aren't you going to do something?"
"Aren't you?"
"You found them."
"It's your turn, now."
"No, it isn't.
You found them.
It's your fault, the whole thing.
I was

watching."
"You joined in, Slim.
You know you did."
"I don't care.
You found them and that's what I'll say when they come

here looking for us."
Red said, "All right for you."
But the thought of the consequences

inspired him anyway, and he reached for the cage door.
Slim said, "Wait!"
Red was glad to.
He said, "Now what's biting you?"
"One of them's got something on him that looks like it might be iron or

something."
"Where?"
"Right there.
I saw it before but I thought it was just part of him.
But

if he's 'people,' maybe it's a disintegrator gun."
"What's that?"
"I read about it in the books from Beforethewars.
Mostly people with

space-ships have disintegrator guns.
They point them at you and you get

disintegratored."
"They didn't point it at us till now," pointed out Red with his heart

not quite in it.
"I don't care.
I'm not hanging around here and getting disintegratored.
I'm getting my father."
"Cowardy-cat.
Yellow cowardy-cat."
"I don't care.
You can call all the names you want, but if you bother

them now you'll get disintegratored.
You wait and see, and it'll be all

your fault."
He made for the narrow spiral stairs that led to the main floor of the

barn, stopped at its head, then backed away.
Red's mother was moving up, panting a little with the exertion and

smiling a tight smile for the benefit of Slim in his capacity as guest.
"Red!
You, Red!
Are you up there?
Now don't try to hide.
I know this is

where you're keeping them.
Cook saw where you ran with the meat."
Red quavered, "Hello, ma!"
"Now show me those nasty animals?
I'm going to see to it that you get

rid of them right away."
It was over!
And despite the imminent corporal punishment, Red felt

something like a load fall from him.
At least the decision was out of

his hands.
"Right there, ma.
I didn't do anything to them, ma.
I didn't know.
They

just looked like little animals and I thought you'd let me keep them,

ma.
I wouldn't have taken the meat only they wouldn't eat grass or

leaves and we couldn't find good nuts or berries and cook never lets me

have anything or I would have asked her and I didn't know it was for

lunch and--"



He was speaking on the sheer momentum of terror and did not realize that

his mother did not hear him but, with eyes frozen and popping at the

cage, was screaming in thin, piercing tones.
X



The Astronomer was saying, "A quiet burial is all we can do.
There is no

point in any publicity now," when they heard the screams.
She had not entirely recovered by the time she reached them, running and

running.
It was minutes before her husband could extract sense from her.
She was saying, finally, "I tell you they're in the barn.
I don't know

what they are.
No, no--"



She barred the Industrialist's quick movement in that direction.
She

said, "Don't _you_ go.
Send one of the hands with a shotgun.
I tell you

I never saw anything like it.
Little horrible beasts with--with--I can't

describe it.
To think that Red was touching them and trying to feed

them.
He was _holding_ them, and feeding them meat."
Red began, "I only--"



And Slim said, "It was not--"



The Industrialist said, quickly, "Now you boys have done enough harm

today.
March!
Into the house!
And not a word; not one word!
I'm not

interested in anything you have to say.
After this is all over, I'll

hear you out and as for you, Red, I'll see that you're properly

punished."
He turned to his wife.
"Now whatever the animals are, we'll have them

killed."
He added quietly once the youngsters were out of hearing,

"Come, come.
The children aren't hurt and, after all, they haven't done

anything really terrible.
They've just found a new pet."
The Astronomer spoke with difficulty.
"Pardon me, ma'am, but can you

describe these animals?"
She shook her head.
She was quite beyond words.
"Can you just tell me if they--"



"I'm sorry," said the Industrialist, apologetically, "but I think I had

better take care of her.
Will you excuse me?"
"A moment.
Please.
One moment.
She said she had never seen such animals

before.
Surely it is not usual to find animals that are completely

unique on an estate such as this."
"I'm sorry.
Let's not discuss that now."
"Except that unique animals might have landed during the night."
The Industrialist stepped away from his wife.
"What are you implying?"
"I think we had better go to the barn, sir!"
The Industrialist stared a moment, turned and suddenly and quite

uncharacteristically began running.
The Astronomer followed and the

woman's wail rose unheeded behind them.
XI



The Industrialist stared, looked at the Astronomer, turned to stare

again.
"Those?"
"Those," said the Astronomer.
"I have no doubt we appear strange and

repulsive to them."
"What do they say?"
"Why, that they are uncomfortable and tired and even a little sick, but

that they are not seriously damaged, and that the youngsters treated

them well."
"Treated them well!
Scooping them up, keeping them in a cage, giving

them grass and raw meat to eat?
Tell me how to speak to them."
"It may take a little time.
Think _at_ them.
Try to listen.
It will come

to you, but perhaps not right away."
The Industrialist tried.
He grimaced with the effort of it, thinking

over and over again, "The youngsters were ignorant of your identity."
And the thought was suddenly in his mind: "We were quite aware of it and

because we knew they meant well by us according to their own view of the

matter, we did not attempt to attack them."
"Attack them?"
thought the Industrialist, and said it aloud in his

concentration.
"Why, yes," came the answering thought.
"We are armed."
One of the revolting little creatures in the cage lifted a metal object

and there was a sudden hole in the top of the cage and another in the

roof of the barn, each hole rimmed with charred wood.
"We hope," the creatures thought, "it will not be too difficult to make

repairs."
The Industrialist found it impossible to organize himself to the point

of directed thought.
He turned to the Astronomer.
"And with that weapon

in their possession they let themselves be handled and caged?
I don't

understand it."
But the calm thought came, "We would not harm the young of an

intelligent species."
XII



It was twilight.
The Industrialist had entirely missed the evening meal

and remained unaware of the fact.
He said, "Do you really think the ship will fly?"
"If they say so," said the Astronomer, "I'm sure it will.
They'll be

back, I hope, before too long."
"And when they do," said the Industrialist, energetically, "I will keep

my part of the agreement.
What is more I will move sky and earth to have

the world accept them.
I was entirely wrong, Doctor.
Creatures that

would refuse to harm children, under such provocation as they received,

are admirable.
But you know--I almost hate to say this--"



"Say what?"
"The kids.
Yours and mine.
I'm almost proud of them.
Imagine seizing

these creatures, feeding them or trying to, and keeping them hidden.
The

amazing gall of it.
Red told me it was his idea to get a job in a circus

on the strength of them.
Imagine!"
The Astronomer said, "Youth!"
XIII



The Merchant said, "Will we be taking off soon?"
"Half an hour," said the Explorer.
It was going to be a lonely trip back.
All the remaining seventeen of

the crew were dead and their ashes were to be left on a strange planet.
Back they would go with a limping ship and the burden of the controls

entirely on himself.
The Merchant said, "It was a good business stroke, not harming the young

ones.
We will get very good terms; _very_ good terms."
The Explorer thought: Business!
The Merchant then said, "They've lined up to see us off.
All of them.
You don't think they're too close, do you?
It would be bad to burn any

of them with the rocket blast at this stage of the game."
"They're safe."
"Horrible-looking things, aren't they?"
"Pleasant enough, inside.
Their thoughts are perfectly friendly."
"You wouldn't believe it of them.
That immature one, the one that first

picked us up--"



"They call him Red," provided the Explorer.
"That's a queer name for a monster.
Makes me laugh.
He actually feels

_bad_ that we're leaving.
Only I can't make out exactly why.
The nearest

I can come to it is something about a lost opportunity with some

organization or other that I can't quite interpret."
"A circus," said the Explorer, briefly.
"What?
Why, the impertinent monstrosity."
"Why not?
What would you have done if you had found _him_ wandering on

_your_ native world; found him sleeping on a field on Earth, red

tentacles, six legs, pseudopods and all?"
XIV



Red watched the ship leave.
His red tentacles, which gave him his

nickname, quivered their regret at lost opportunity to the very last,

and the eyes at their tips filled with drifting yellowish crystals that

were the equivalent of Earthly tears.
Transcriber's Note:



    This etext was produced from _Space Science Fiction_ May 1952.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.

    copyright on this publication was renewed.
Minor spelling and

    typographical errors have been corrected without note.
let together isaac asimov illustrate engle transcriber note etext produce infinity february extensive research uncover evidence u copyright publication renew kind peace endure century forget anything else scarcely know react discover kind war finally certainly elia lynn chief bureau robotic sure ought react finally find bureau robotic headquarter cheyenne line century old trend toward decentralization lynn stare dubiously young security officer washington bring news elia lynn large almost charmingly homely pale blue eye bulge bit man usually comfortable stare eye security officer remain calm lynn decide first reaction ought incredulity hell incredulity believe ease back chair say certain information security officer introduce ralph g breckenridge present credential match softness youth full lip plump cheek flush easily guileless eye clothing line cheyenne suit universally air condition washington security despite everything center breckenridge flush say doubt suppose say lynn unable keep trace sarcasm tone particularly aware slightly stress pronoun reference enemy equivalent capitalization print cultural habit generation precede say east red soviet russians confuse since east red soviet especially russians much simple much precise traveler frequently report reverse appropriate language scarcely anyone give think thing quite comfortable casual hatred begin call cold war game almost good natured game unspoken rule kind decency lynn say abruptly disturb situation rise stand stare wall map world split two region faint edging color irregular portion leave map edge mild green small irregular portion right map border wash pink map change much century loss formosa gain east germany eighty year last territorial switch importance another change significant enough color two generation territory brood bloody red pure undefiled white neutrality color lynn see map side say say breckenridge well accustom fact course sir realize pleasant far ahead we robotic eye remain guileless ever hide knife edge word plunge deep lynn quiver impact course account chief robotic learn late security officer lose caste eye government robotic really fail struggle lynn expect political mercy lynn say wearily true far ahead we build humanoid robot sir yes matter fact build model experimental purpose ten year ago make ten year progress since lynn disturb wonder incredulity concern whole business really result wound pride fear job reputation embarrassed possibility yet force defense say young stalemate we never perfect every detail always ahead facet another facet another ahead we right robotic place great proportion effort robotic mean branch endeavor receive great share effort mean ahead force field research hyper atomic perhaps lynn feel distress statement stalemate perfect true enough great danger threaten world world depend stalemate perfect possible small unevennesse always exist balance far direction almost begin cold war side develop thermonuclear weapon war become unthinkable competition switch military economic psychological stay ever since always drive effort side break stalemate develop parry every possible thrust develop thrust parry something war possible either side want war desperately afraid side crucial discovery first hundred year side keep struggle process peace maintain hundred year byproduct continuously intensive research force field produce solar energy insect control robot side make begin understand mentalic name give biochemistry biophysic think side outpost moon mar mankind advance giant stride force draft necessary side decent humane possible among lest cruelty tyranny friend make side stalemate break war lynn say consult man opinion trustworthy lynn look disgust good lord robotic investigate clear death yes vouch trust humphrey carl laszlo position face kind attack launch matter else hear laszlo say breckenridge good pass yes think possibility robot invade u exactly say breckenridge softly accept full truth think fact robot already invade u laszlo grandson hungarian break call iron curtain comfortable suspicion feel thick set bald pugnacious graven forever snub face accent clear harvard almost excessively soft speak lynn conscious year administration long expert various phase modern robotic laszlo comfort receptacle complete knowledge lynn feel well mere presence lynn say scowl twist laszlo face ferociously far ahead we completely incredible mean produce humanoid tell human close quarter mean considerable advance robo mentalic personally involve say breckenridge coldly leave professional pride account exactly impossible ahead we laszlo shrug assure acquaint literature robotic approximately approximately really mean correct breckenridge ever visit side say laszlo shortly dr lynn lynn say either breckenridge say robotic visit side twenty five year ask question kind confidence indicate know answer matter second atmosphere heavy think discomfort cross laszlo broad face say matter fact hold conference robotic long twenty five year say breckenridge significant maybe say laszlo reluctantly something else bother none ever conference robotic none remember invite ask breckenridge lynn stare worried interpose quickly course breckenridge say refuse attendance type scientific conference hold say laszlo pace floor hear case chief say lynn breckenridge say put position return invitation afraid man talk much exactly seem lynn feel helpless conviction security story true steal else contact side robotic cross fertilize trickle researcher move direction strictly basis year date back day eisenhower khrushchev great many good motive honest appreciation supra national character science impulse friendliness hard wipe completely individual human desire expose fresh interesting outlook slightly stale notion greet other fresh interesting government anxious continue always obvious think learn tell little side gain exchange case robotic little carry conviction moreover know along lynn think darkly take complacent side do nothing publicly robotic tempt sit back smugly comfortable assurance superiority seem possible likely hide superior card trump hand proper laszlo say shakenly obvious line think carry conviction parrot lynn hard right anything complete horror come conviction ten humanoid robot somewhere united state carry fragment tc bomb tc race sheer horror bomb ery end tc total conversion sun long synonym total conversion make sun penny candle ten humanoid completely harmless separation simple act come together exceed critical mass lynn rise foot heavily dark pouch eye ordinarily lend ugly face savage foreboding prominent ever go we figure way mean tell humanoid human find humanoid quickly mutter laszlo later five minute together bark lynn breckenridge nod glad we sir bring back washington conference lynn raise eyebrow right wonder delay long convince replace forthwith chief bureau robotic confer washington suddenly wish earnestly exactly pass first presidential assistant secretary science secretary security lynn breckenridge five sit table dungeon underground fortress near washington presidential assistant jeffrey impressive handsome white haired trifle jowly fashion solid thoughtful unobtrusive politically presidential assistant ought speak incisively three question face we first humanoid go together second go together third stop together secretary science amberley nod convulsively dean northwestern engineering appointment thin sharp feature noticeably edgy forefinger trace slow circle table far together say suppose definite ask lynn sharply u least month already security say lynn turn automatically breckenridge secretary security macalaster intercept glance macalaster say information reliable let breckenridge apparent youth fool dr lynn part value we actually department ten year moscow nearly year without none terrible danger know we detail crucial one say lynn macalaster security smile frostily heavy chin close set eye know public almost nothing else say finitely human dr lynn agent breckenridge do great deal presidential assistant jeffrey cut let we certain amount action instant necessary happen seem likely wait specific know place perhaps become self evident go tc target cripple we much possible seem major city case major metropolis target worth tc bomb four possibility washington administrative center new york financial center detroit pittsburgh two chief industrial center macalaster security say vote new york administration industry decentralize point destruction particular city prevent instant retaliation new york ask amberly science perhaps sharply intend finance decentralize question morale intend destroy resist induce surrender sheer horror first blow great destruction human life new york metropolitan area pretty cold blooded mutter lynn say macalaster security capable think mean final victory stroke presidential assistant jeffrey brush back white hair let assume bad let assume new york destroy winter preferably immediately serious blizzard communication bad disruption utility food supply fringe area serious effect stop amberley science find ten man two hundred twenty million awfully small needle awfully large haystack jeffrey shake head wrong ten humanoid among two hundred twenty million human difference say amberley science humanoid differentiate human sight probably look lynn lynn say heavily cheyenne pass human daylight say macalaster security physically sure advance mentalic procedure point reel micro electronic pattern brain focus positronic pathway robot lynn stare imply create replica human complete personality memory specific human being right base agent breckenridge finding yes evidence dispute lynn bent head think moment say ten man united state man humanoid original available oriental easy spot east european introduce country radar network entire world border tight drum introduce individual human humanoid without know macalaster security say do certain legitimate seepage across border businessman pilot tourist watch course side ten kidnap use model humanoid humanoid send back place since expect substitution pass we americans begin difficulty get country simple friend family difference assume believe wait report imply sudden attack amnesia troublesome change personality check thousand amberley science stare finger tip ordinary measure work attack bureau robotic depend chief bureau eye turn sharply expectantly lynn lynn feel bitterness rise seem conference come intend nothing say say sure solution problem pregnant suggestion device record device part man gravely fear defeat wish responsibility place clearly unequivocally someone else yet justice robotic fallen short lynn lynn merely lynn robotic responsibility say spend wakeful night haggardness body soul seek attain another interview presidential assistant jeffrey next morning breckenridge lynn prefer private conference justice situation obvious breckenridge attain enormous influence government result successful intelligence work lynn say sir consider possibility hop uselessly enemy pipe sure however impatient public grow time however legislator sometimes expedient talk government least recognize world stalemate beneficial recognize ten humanoid tc bomb trivial break stalemate destruction fifteen million human being scarcely trivial world power standpoint demoralize we we surrender cripple we convince we win old planetary death war side avoid long successfully accomplish force we fight minus city enough suggest say jeffrey coldly ten humanoid country tc bomb wait together agree thing perhaps reason great mid winter bomb madness physical destruction result humanoid get together bad happen we moral intellectual destruction come due respect agent breckenridge intend we humanoid humanoid never suppose together merely remain separate order we something worry measure already take humanoid suppose security go file citizen ever across border close enough kidnap possible since macalaster mention yesterday follow suspicious psychiatric case else jeffrey say small x ray device instal key place large city mass arena instance ten humanoid slip among hundred thousand spectator football game air polo match exactly concert hall church start somewhere particularly panic avoid say lynn public realize unpredictable moment unpredictable city human content suddenly cease exist suppose obvious drive lynn say strenuously grow fraction national effort divert entirely nasty problem amberley call find small needle large haystack chase tail madly increase research lead point long catch surrender without chance snap finger retaliation consider news leak become involve counter measure begin guess panic we harm tc bomb presidential assistant say irritably heaven name suggest nothing say lynn call bluff live live gamble dare break stalemate sake bomb headstart impossible say jeffrey completely impossible welfare we largely hand nothing agree perhaps x ray machine sport arena kind skin deep measure effective do aftermath bitter conclusion toss country away sake subtle line reason encourage nothingism fact counter gambit active indeed presidential assistant jeffrey look breckenridge young security officer hitherto calmly silent say talk possible future break stalemate stalemate break matter whether humanoid explode maybe bait divert we fact remain quarter century behind robotic fatal advance robotic surprise we war start answer divert entire force immediately crash program robotic research first problem humanoid call exercise robotic call prevention death fifteen million man woman child lynn shake head helplessly play hand we lure blind alley free advance direction jeffrey say impatiently guess breckenridge make suggestion channel government approve begin science conference science breckenridge say list every important scientist every branch natural science cheyenne point agenda advance robotic major specific sub head develop receive device electromagnetic field cerebral cortex sufficiently delicate distinguish protoplasmic human brain positronic humanoid brain jeffrey say hope willing charge conference consult obviously short sir agree charge lynn smile briefly matter responsibility responsibility clearly lynn robotic feel breckenridge really charge say agree breckenridge lynn return together cheyenne evening laszlo listen sullen mistrust lynn description come event laszlo say go chief start put five experimental model humanoid structure test procedure man twelve hour day three shift overlap get arrange conference go crowd red tape everything work halt breckenridge say temporary gain lose laszlo scowl bunch astrophysicist geochemist around help damn toward robotic view specialist field helpful sure detect brain wave differentiate human humanoid wave pattern set project anyway say breckenridge robotic young security agent say calmly study robotic access text material deal russian robotic russian top secret material advance anything lynn say ruefully we laszlo basis material breckenridge go suggest particular line investigation reasonably certain copy electromagnetic pattern specific human mind specific positronic brain perfectly exact duplicate make complicate positronic brain small enough fit human size skull hundred time less complex human brain pick overtone therefore advantage fact laszlo look impressed despite lynn smile grimly easy resent breckenridge come intrusion several hundred scientist non robotic specialty problem intriguing consolation least come quietly lynn find nothing sit office alone executive position grown merely titular perhaps help give picture creative scientist half world converge cheyenne breckenridge cool efficiency handle detail preparation kind confidence say let together lick let together come lynn quietly anyone watch lynn moment see eye blink slowly twice surely nothing whirling detachment keep calm feel right ought go mad seek breckenridge improvise quarter breckenridge alone frown anything wrong sir lynn say wearily everything right invoke martial law chief division opinion situation warrant division dictator chalk beauty decentralization rescind order immediately breckenridge take step forward washington hear ruin ruin anyway realize set role great villain american history let break stalemate nothing lose perhaps great deal gain laugh little wildly target division robotic eh breckenridge thousand man kill tc bomb capable wipe three hundred square mile micro second five hundred man great scientist peculiar position fight war brain shot surrender surrender impossible lynn hear understand humanoid pass security provision together get together help order scientist visit side breckenridge visit regularly make point strange robotic ten scientist place ten humanoid converge cheyenne ridiculous guess good breckenridge work unless know humanoid america call conference first place quite coincidence bring news humanoid suggest conference suggest agenda run show exactly scientist invite sure right ten include dr lynn cry breckenridge outrage poise rush forward lynn say move get blaster wait scientist x ray monitor radioactivity two together without check five hundred clear blaster surrender ten humanoid sit breckenridge sit lynn say wait tired laszlo spell wait professor manuelo jiminez institute high study bueno air explode stratospheric jet travel three mile amazon valley simple chemical explosion enough destroy plane dr herman liebowitz explode monorail kill twenty injure hundred other similar manner dr auguste marin l institut nucl onique montreal seven other die various stage journey cheyenne laszlo hurtle pale face stammer first news two hour lynn sit face breckenridge blaster hand laszlo say think nut chief right humanoid turn stare hate fill eye breckenridge warn warn leave intact study god cry lynn frenzy haste thrust blaster toward breckenridge fire security neck vanish torso fall head drop thud floor roll crookedly lynn moan understand think traitor nothing laszlo stand immobile mouth open moment incapable speech lynn say wildly sure warn sit chair unless equip build radio transmission breckenridge moscow real breckenridge oh god eleven laszlo manage hoarse squeak explode hang suppose sure other receive message safely destroy lord lord bring news realize truth shoot fast enough god know second beat laszlo say shakily least study bent put finger sticky fluid trickle mangle remain neck end headless body blood high grade machine oil illustration god watch nitroglycerine magnificent possession isaac asimov walter sill labor year unknown laboratory worker fifty make great discovery fame rich fate interference loom form unreliable character nature walter sill reflect reflect often life hard joyless survey dingy chemical laboratory grin cynically work dirty hole place live occasional ore analysis barely pay absolutely indispensable equipment other half worth perhaps work big industrial concern take life easy look window hudson river ruddie flame die sun wonder moodily whether last experiment finally bring fame success merely false alarm unlocked door creak open crack cheerful face eugene taylor burst view sill wave taylor body follow head enter laboratory hello old soak come loud carefree hail thing sill shake head exuberance wish foolish outlook life gene information thing bad need money need less money either demand taylor worry fifty worry get anything except bald head thirty keep beautiful brown hair chemist grin money yet gene new idea shape tell much show progress make taylor follow sill small table stand rack test tube half inch shiny metallic substance sodium mercury mixture sodium amalgam call explain sill point take bottle label ammonium chloride sol shelf pour little tube immediately sodium amalgam begin change loosely pack spongy substance observe sill ammonium amalgam ammonium radical nh act metal combine mercury wait action completion pour supernatant liquid ammonium amalgam stable inform taylor work fast grasp flask straw colored pleasant smell liquid fill test tube upon shake loosely pack ammonium amalgam vanish stead small drop metallic liquid roll bottom taylor gaze test tube open mouth happen liquid complex derivative hydrazine discover name ammonaline work formula yet matter point property dissolve ammonium amalgam drop bottom pure mercury ammonium solution taylor remain unresponsive sill wax enthusiastic implication go half towards isolate pure ammonium never do accomplish mean fame success nobel prize know else wow taylor gaze become respectful yellow stuff important snatch sill withhold finish mean gene get free metallic state far every evaporate ammonaline ammonium break everlaste ammonia hydrogen two week later epilogue previous scene enact taylor receive hurry emphatic call chemist friend appear laboratory flurry anticipation get get big think million really sill eye shone rapture work wrong angle explain heat solvent always break dissolve ammonium separate freeze work brine frozen slowly freeze fresh ice salt crystallize luckily ammonaline freeze degree centigrade require much cool point dramatically small beaker inside glass wall case beaker contain pale straw colored needle crystal cover top thin layer dullish yellow substance case ask taylor get fill argon keep ammonium yellow substance top ammonaline pure active react anything else helium type gas taylor marvel pound complacently smile friend back wait gene good yet taylor lead end room sill tremble finger point another airtight case contain lump metal gleam yellow sparkle glisten friend ammonium oxide nh form pass absolutely dry air free ammonium metal perfectly inert seal case contain quite bit chlorine instance yet reaction make cheaply aluminum yet look gold gold possibility explode taylor sweep country ammonium jewelry ammonium plate table ware million thing know many countless industrial application rich walt rich rich correct sill gently move towards telephone newspaper go hear go begin cash fame right taylor frown maybe well keep secret walt oh breathe hint process general idea besides safe patent application washington right sill wrong article paper usher hectic two day two j throgmorton bankhead commonly know captain industry head acme chromium silver plate corporation doubt deserve title patient long suffer wife merely dyspeptic grouchy husband especially breakfast table breakfast table rustle morning paper angrily sputter bite butter toast ruin country point aghast big black headline say crazy bedbug satisfied joseph please plead wife get purple face remember high blood pressure doctor tell stop read news washington annoy listen dear cook doctor damn fool shout j throgmorton bankhead read news please purple face raise cup coffee mouth take critical sip eye fall upon insignificant headline towards bottom page savant discover gold substitute coffee cup remain air scan article quickly new metal run part claim discoverer far superior chromium nickel silver plate purpose besides ideal material cheap beautiful jewelry twenty dollar week clerk say professor sill eat ammonium plate impressive appearance gold plate indian nabob j throgmorton bankhead stop read vision ruin acme chromium silver plate corporation dance eye dance cup coffee drop hand splash hot liquid trouser wife rise foot alarm joseph nothing bankhead shout nothing god sake away strode angrily room leave wife search paper vain anything disturb bob tavern fifteenth street usually pretty fill time morning speak empty except four five rather poorly dress man cluster portly dignify form peter q hornswoggle eminent ex congressman peter q hornswoggle usual speak fluently subject usual concern life congressman remember case point say argument bring house answer follow eminent gentleman nevada statement overlook important aspect problem realize interest entire nation apple parer country attend promptly gentleman welfare apple parer depend future entire fruit industry fruit industry base entire economy great glorious nation united state america hornswoggle pause swallow half pint beer smile triumph hesitation say gentleman statement entire house burst wild tumultuous applause assemble listener shake head slowly marvel great able spiel senator musta sensation yeah agree bartender dirty shame beat last election ex congressman wince dignify tone begin reliably inform bribery campaign reach unprecedented prop voice die away suddenly catch sight certain article newspaper listener snatch read silence thereupon eye gleam sudden idea friend say turn press work do immediately city hall leant whisper barkeeper get twenty five cent leave wallet mayor office mistake surely repay tomorrow clutch quarter reluctantly give peter q hornswoggle leave small dimly light room somewhere lower reach first avenue michael maguire know police far euphonious name mike slug clean trusty revolver hum tuneless song door open crack mike look slappy yeh short wizene person sidle brung ya de evenin sheet de cop tinkin bragoni pull de job yeh good bent unconcernedly revolver anything else naw dippy dame kill dat toss newspaper mike leave mike lean back flip page bore manner headline attract eye read short article follow finish throw aside paper light cigarette heavy think open door hey slappy c mere job get do night trouble walter sill happy deliriously walk laboratory king survey strut peacock bask new find glory eugene taylor sit watch scarcely less happy famous taylor want million dollar go sell secret ammonium metal fat land practical detail walt get touch staple eagle steel today decent price bell rang sill jump run open door home walter sill large scowl visitor gaze superciliously yes sill wish yes name j throgmorton bankhead represent acme chromium silver plate corporation moment discussion right right eugene taylor associate speak freely bankhead seat heavily suppose surmise reason visit read new ammonium metal paper right whether truth story buy process sir sill lead magnate argon fill container gram pure ammonium metal right get oxide oxide metallic metal strangely enough oxide paper call substitute gold bankhead face show atom sink feel within view oxide dismay open say let sill shake head mr bankhead first sample ammonium ammonium oxide ever exist museum piece easily wish expect sink money satisfy willing buy patent much oh thousand dollar thousand dollar exclaim sill taylor together fair price gentleman million shout taylor outrage tone discovery goldmine million indeed dream gentleman fact matter company track ammonium year point solve problem unfortunately beat we week wish buy patent order save company great deal annoyance realize course refuse price ahead manufacture metal use process sue say taylor get money long protract expensive lawsuit bankhead smile nastily prove however unreasonable price two thousand hear price answer taylor stonily nothing right gentleman bankhead walk towards door sure open door reveal symmetrical form peter q hornswoggle bent rapt concentration keyhole bankhead sneer audibly ex congressman jump foot consternation bow rapidly two three time anything well financier pass disdainfully hornswoggle enter slam door behind face two bewilder friend dear sir malefactor great wealth economic royalist type predatory interest ruination country quite right refuse offer place hand ample chest smile benignantly devil rasp taylor suddenly recover initial surprise hornswoggle take aback er peter quintus hornswoggle surely house representative last year never hear bless read paper wonderful discovery place service foot service two man world new invention prey every self seek unscrupulous person come along bankhead instance practical affair experience world inestimable handle affair attend detail nothing course eh taylor ask sardonically hornswoggle cough convulsively naturally think small interest discovery fittingly assign sill remain silent rise foot suddenly hear call police professor sill pray excite hornswoggle retreat uneasily towards door taylor hold open pass protest swear softly door slam face sill sink wearily nearest chair gene offer two thousand week ago beyond anything hope forget fellow bluff listen go right call staple sell ought plenty trouble bankhead staple worry pat shoulder trouble practically unfortunately however taylor wrong trouble begin across street furtive figure beady eye peer upturned coat collar survey house carefully curious policeman identify slappy egan bother slappy remain unmoleste cripe mutter dis gon na cinch de whole woik bottom floor back window jimmy wid toot pick alarm nuttin chuckle walk away slappy alone idea peter q hornswoggle walk away find strange thought wander massive cranium thought involve certain amount unorthodox action j throgmorton bankhead likewise active belong virile class know getter scrupulous get certainly intend pay million dollar secret ammonium find necessary call certain acquaintance acquaintance useful bit unsavory bankhead find advisable careful cautious visit however conversation ensue end pleasing manner walter sill snap uneasy sleep startle suddenness listen anxiously lean nudge taylor reward incoherent snuffle gene gene wake eh bother shut listen hear hear anything alone sill put finger lip quiet distinct shuffle noise laboratory taylor eye widen sleep leave entirely burglar whisper two crept bed don bathrobe slipper tiptoe door taylor revolver take lead descend stair traverse perhaps half flight sudden surprised shout follow series loud thresh noise continue moment loud crash glassware ammonium cry sill stricken voice rush headlong stair evade taylor clutch arm chemist burst laboratory follow closely curse associate click light two struggle figure blink owlishly sudden illumination separate taylor gun cover nice say two lurch foot amid tangle break beaker flask nursing cut wrist bent portly body dignify bow peter q hornswoggle doubt say eye unwavere firearm nervously circumstance seem suspicious explain easily spite rough treatment receive make reasonable proposal feel great deal kindly interest two therefore world know iniquity mankind decide keep eye house tonight see neglect precaution house breaker judge surprise dastardly creature point flat nosed plug ugly remain floor daze creep back window immediately risk life limb follow criminal attempt desperately save great discovery really deserve great credit do sure valuable person deal reconsider answer early proposal taylor listen cynical smile certainly lie fluently p q continue great length great forcefulness burglar suddenly raise voice loud protest cripe boss dis fat slob tryin bad followin order boss fellow hire rifle safe oinin bit honest money plain safe crackin boss hurt den gettin de job warmin crawl dis little guy wid chisel blowtorch make de safe natur lly competition lay hornswoggle draw icy hauteur remain see whether word gangster take word truthfully eminent member great quiet shout taylor wave gun threateningly call police annoy story walt everything right sill return inspection laboratory knock empty glassware everything else unharmed good taylor begin choke dismay hallway cool individual hat draw eye enter revolver expertly handle change situation considerably k grunt taylor drop gat weapon slip reluctant finger hit floor clank new menace survey four other sardonic glance two other try beat seem popular place sill taylor stare stupidly hornswoggle tooth chatter energetically first mobster move back uneasily mutter pete sake mike slug yeah mike rasp mike slug lot guy afraid pull trigger anytime baldy hand work stuff fake gold count five sill move slowly toward old safe corner mike step back carelessly room coat sleeve brush shelf small vial sodium sulphate solution totter fall sudden inspiration sill yell god watch nitroglycerine vial hit floor smash tinkle break glass involuntarily mike yell jump wild dismay taylor crash beautiful fly tackle sill lunge taylor fallen weapon cover two however long need begin confusion fade hurriedly night whence come taylor mike slug roll round round laboratory floor lock desperate struggle sill hop pray moment comparative quiet bring revolver sharp sudden contact gangster skull moment come suddenly mike lunge catch taylor stunningly chin jerk free sill yell consternation pull trigger flee figure shot wild mike escape unharmed sill make attempt follow sluice stream cold water bring taylor back sense shake head dazedly survey surround shamble whew say night sill groan go gene live danger never think possibility thief never tell discovery newspaper oh harm do weep listen first back sleep bother we tonight tomorrow bank put paper outline detail process vault do long ago staple p close deal last live happily ever chemist shake head dolefully ammonium certainly prove upset far almost wish never hear almost rather back ore analysis unexpected surprise walter sill rattle cross town towards bank find reason change wish comfort homely jiggle ancient batter automobile fail cheer life characterize peaceful monotony enter period bedlam satisfied change rich poverty peculiar problem remark sententiously brake car two story marble edifice bank step carefully stretch cramp leg head revolve door right away two husky specimen human race step side sill feel hard object press painful intensity rib open mouth involuntarily reward icy voice ear quiet baldy deserve damn trick pull last night sill shiver subside recognize mike slug voice easily detail ask mike quick inside jacket pocket croak sill tremulously mike companion pass hand dexterously indicate pocket flick three four fold sheet foolscap dat mike hasty appraisal nod yeh get right baldy sudden shove two gangster jump car drive away rapidly chemist sprawl sidewalk kindly hand raise right manage gasp trip hurt find alone pass bank drop nearest bench near collapse doubt new life prepare taylor foresee possibility sort happen think car trail yet surprise fright almost ruin everything shrug thin shoulder take hat abstract fold sheet paper sweatband work five minute deposit vault immensely strong steel door swing shut feel relieve wonder mutter home follow instruction paper purse lip shake head go heck explosion sill arrive home three policeman pace leisurely sidewalk front house police guard explain taylor shortly trouble last night chemist relate event bank taylor nod grimly checkmate staple two hour police care thing afterwards shrug staple affair listen gene chemist put suddenly worried ammonium test plate ability important thing staple come pigeon milk hmm taylor stroke chin right staple come let plate something spoon suppose satisfaction really annoying sill complain fretfully troublesome hooligan proceed slipshod unscientific manner let eat dinner first mid day meal begin apparatus set feverish haste cubic vat foot saturate solution ammonaline pour old batter spoon cathode mass ammonium amalgam separate rest solution perforate glass partition anode three battery series provide current sill explain animatedly work principle ordinary copper plate ammonium ion electric current run attract cathode spoon ordinarily break unstable case dissolve ammonaline ammonaline slightly ionize oxygen give anode much theory let we happen practice close key taylor watch breathless interest moment effect visible taylor look disappoint sill grasp sleeve hiss watch anode sure enough bubble gas slowly form upon spongy ammonium amalgam shift attention spoon gradually notice change metallic appearance become dull silver color slowly lose whiteness layer distinct dull yellow build fifteen minute current run sill break circuit content sigh plate perfectly say good let sill aghast pure ammonium expose ordinary air water vapor dissolve nh oh drag rather bulky piece apparatus table say compress air container run calcium chloride dryer bubble perfectly dry oxygen safely dilute four time volume nitrogen directly solvent introduce nozzle solution beneath spoon turn slow stream air work magic almost lightning speed yellow coat begin glitter gleam shine almost ethereal beauty two man watch beat heart pant breath sill shut air watch wonderful spoon say nothing taylor whisper hoarsely let god beautiful reverent awe sill approach spoon grasp forcep withdraw surround liquid follow immediately never fully describe later excite newspaper reporter press unmercifully neither taylor sill least recollection happening next minute happen moment ammonium plate spoon expose open air horrible odor ever conceive assail nostril odor describe terrible broth hell plunge room sheer horrible nightmare strangle gasp sill drop spoon cough retch tear wildly throat mouth yell weep sneeze taylor pounce upon spoon look wildly odor grow steadily powerful wild exertion escape already succeed wreck laboratory upset vat ammonaline sill spoon go fly open window middle twelfth avenue hit sidewalk right foot policeman taylor care clothe burn sill gasp spray something laboratory anything strong smell burn sulphur liquid bromine tear clothe distraction realize someone walk unlocked door bell rung neither hear staple six foot lion man steel king step hall ruin dignity utterly collapse tear sob twelfth avenue treat spectacle elderly richly dress gentleman tear uptown fast foot carry shed much clothe dare spoon continue deadly work three policeman long since retire abject rout numb torture sense two innocent suffer cause entire mess come roar confuse shout street man woman pour neighbor house horse bolt fire engine clang street abandon rider squadron police come leave sill taylor finally give clothe trouser run pell mell hudson stop find neck deep water bless pure air taylor turn bewilder eye sill emit horrible odor say stable stable solid odor take vapor ever smell musk groan sill aroma indefinite period without lose appreciable weight something two ruminate silence wince whenever wind bring vagrant waft ammonium vapor taylor say low voice finally trace trouble spoon make afraid sue maybe throw jail sill face lengthen wish never see damn stuff bring nothing trouble torture spirit give sob loudly taylor pat back mournfully bad course discovery famous able demand price work industrial lab country cinch win nobel prize right sill smile counteract odor hope hope say taylor feelingly let back manage remove spoon transcriber note story appear july issue future fiction magazine produce greg week stephen blundell online distribute proofread team https www pgdp net youth isaac asimov red slim find two strange little animal morning hear thunder sound know never show new pet parent illustration spatter pebble window youngster stir sleep another awake sit stiffly bed second pass interpret strange surrounding home course country colder green window slim call hoarse urgent whisper youngster bound open window slim real name new friend meet day need slight figure slim add red red real name either appropriateness obvious friend instantly quick unquestione friendship young one yet quite adolescence first stain adulthood begin appearance slim cry hi red wave cheerfully blink sleep red keep croak whisper quiet wake somebody slim notice sun scarcely top low hill east shadow long soft grass wet slim say softly matter red wave slim dress quickly gladly confine morning wash momentary sprinkle little lukewarm water let air dry expose portion body run bare skin grow wet dewy grass red say get quiet mom wake dad dad hand catch death cold mimic voice tone faithfully slim laugh think never funny fellow red slim say eagerly every day red real early whole world red else around feel proud allow entrance private world red stare sidelong say carelessly hour hear last night hear thunder thunderstorm slim never sleep thunderstorm guess thunder hear go window rain star sky get sort almost gray mean slim never see nod think say red walk along grassy side concrete road split panorama right middle vanish among hill old red father red build crack rough spot red say keep secret sure red kind secret secret maybe maybe yet red break long supple stem fern pass methodically strip leaflet swung leave whip fashion moment wild charger rear champ iron control get tired toss whip aside stow charger away corner imagination future say circus around slim say secret know dad tell come secret fine secret ever circus oh sure bet anything well red watch corner eye ever circus mean good slim consider guess astronomer dad want huh astronomer say red slim feel door new private world close astronomy become dead star black empty space say placatingly circus fun say mean red grow argumentative suppose chance join circus right red affect scornful laughter slim sting join red whirl strange intense mean illustration mean slim step back bit surprised unexpected challenge get something we circus maybe someday circus big circus fellow world otherwise guess think let good old slim chance world strange glamorous slim say sure red huh red figure important circuse slim think desperately want right answer finally say acrobat holy smoke five step acrobat animal good side show big crowd main ring good act animal act doubt red voice everyone think anyone anyway find animal morning two get sure secret tell course okay get barn almost barn huge open door black black head slim stop track try word casual big fool big hurt long get cage barn slim see large cage suspend hook roof cover stiff canvas red say use bird something anyway away let loft clamber wooden stair red hook cage toward slim point say sort hole canvas red frown lift canvas look say relief canvas appear burn worried slim slim nod slowly sure want canvas jerk two red say small sort disgusting look animal move quickly canvas lift side toward youngster red poke cautious finger watch say slim agony hurt say red ever anything circus jump chance maybe small circus red look annoy let cage swung back forth pendulum fashion try back small worry right get worry get keep till circus come get figure feed meanwhile cage swung little trap creature clung bar gesture youngster queer quick motion almost intelligent ii astronomer enter dine room decorum feel much guest say youngster son room industrialist smile hour however breakfast force among woman ago nothing worry youth doctor youth youth word seem depress astronomer eat breakfast silence industrialist say really day look normal astronomer say afterward industrialist say pardon conceive play elaborate hoax really speak speak least sense project thought gather letter wonder ask course vague perhaps understand involve projector focusse think conscious attention part projector receptor quite realize try think projector part science we perhaps say industrialist yet change bring society think projector change good we old age change unwelcome say astronomer race old individual industrialist point window road build beforethewar exactly good day build possibly duplicate race young build eh yes least afraid new thing wish society beforethewar destroy doctor good youth new thing well world peaceful jog along race go nowhere nowhere prove man build road speak visitor agree race go nowhere say astronomer earnestly go toward final destruction university small student body year few book write less work do old sleep sun day peaceful unchange day find nearer death say industrialist dismiss listen write investigate position planetary economy find solvent interrupt industrialist smile yes oh joke yet perhaps joke far less solvent father less solvent father perhaps son long solvent become troublesome planet support industry exist toothpick oak tree beforethewar back village economy cave infusion fresh technological knowledge change new knowledge rather whole effect change broaden horizon sir choose approach matter rich influential government official unusual reputation day dare break tradition resist change handle youth race revive yes atomic bomb atomic bomb return astronomer need end civilization visitor mine atomic bomb whatever equivalent world survive bomb defeat we shell shock last chance reverse process illustration say industrialist friend space return astronomer hesitate say truthful denser planet rich light atom magnesium aluminum sir carbon hydrogen coal oil really astronomer say quickly go creature master space travel therefore atomic power coal oil answer industrialist smile good evidence yet truth story superficially atomic power seem preclude coal oil however quite apart energy gain combustion remain always remain basic raw material organic chemistry plastic dye pharmaceutical solvent industry exist without atomic age coal oil low price sell we trouble torture racial youth answer commodity dear offer gratis astronomer sigh say boy visible open window stand together grassy field lose animate conversation industrialist son point imperiously astronomer son nod make run toward house industrialist say youth speak race much ever yes age quickly pour mold slim scuttle room door bang behind astronomer say mild disapproval slim look surprise come halt beg pardon anyone sorry interrupt enunciation almost painfully precise industrialist say right youngster astronomer say enter empty room son cause slam door nonsense insist industrialist youngster do harm simply scold young view say slim lad slim advance slowly country eh much sir thank son show place yes sir red mean call red call two eh slim look away explore sir industrialist turn astronomer youthful curiosity adventure lust race yet lose slim say sir yes lad youngster take long get say red send something good eat exactly mean cook something good young uns eat oh sir mean animal animal yes sir animal eat astronomer say afraid son city breed say industrialist harm kind animal lad small sir grass leave nut berry probably trick thank sir slim run close door gently behind astronomer say suppose trap animal alive obviously perturb common enough shoot estate tame country full rodent small creature red always come home pet sort another rarely maintain interest long look wall clock friend iii sway halt dark explorer comfortable alien air feel thick soup breathe shallowly reach sudden need company merchant warm touch breathe rough move occasional spasm obviously asleep explorer hesitate decide wake serve real purpose rescue course penalty pay high profit unrestraine competition lead merchant open new planet ten year monopoly trade hug likely rent comer stiff price follow planet search secrecy preferably away usual trade route case little chance another ship within range subetheric except improbable coincidence ship rather cage explorer grasp thick bar blast away stick high open air leap bad land twice scout ship establish contact native grotesquely huge mild unaggressive obvious own flourish technology face consequence technology wonderful market tremendous world merchant especially take aback know figure express planet diameter distance two light second stand visi plate mutter unbelievable oh large world explorer say explorer easily impressed inhabit drop planet large ocean drown explorer smile gentle dig arcturian homeland small planet say quite merchant follow along line thought inhabitant large proportion world sound news strike less favorably nearly ten time height sure friendly hard friendship alien intelligence imponderable dangerous across group maintain equilibrium atomic war stage result introversion retreat gradual decadence increase gentleness monster principle remain explorer feel heavy throb engine frown say descend bit quickly speculation danger land hour planetary target huge oxygen water world lack size uninhabitable hydrogen ammonia planet low density make surface gravity fairly normal gravitational force fall slowly distance short gravitational potential high ship calculator run mill model design plot land trajectory potential range mean pilot manual control wiser install high power model mean trip outpost civilization lose perhaps lose secret merchant demand immediate land merchant feel necessary defend position say angrily explorer pilot know job land safely twice yes think explorer scout ship unmaneuverable freighter aloud say nothing keep eye visi plate descend quickly room doubt much quickly merchant say peevishly keep silence wish speak suggest strap floater help prepare ejector pilot fight noble fight beginner atmosphere abnormally high thick gravitational potential world whip burn ship last look bring control despite maintain course follow extrapolate line point northern continent toward head circumstance shade luck story eventually tell retell heroic masterly reversal lose situation within sight victory tired body tired nerve clamp control bar shade much pressure ship almost level dip room retrieve final error mile leave fall pilot remain post actual land think break force crash maintain spaceworthiness vessel survive ship buck madly soupy atmosphere ejector mobilize afterwards explorer lift unconsciousness rise foot definite feel merchant survivor perhaps calculation floater burn sufficiently distant surface fall stun merchant less luck surround world thick ropy stalk grass distance tree remind vaguely similar structure native arcturian world except low branch high consider normal tree top call voice sound basso thick air merchant answer explorer make toward thrust violently coarse stalk bar path hurt ask merchant grimace sprain something hurt walk explorer probe gently anything break walk despite pain rest first important ship spaceworthy repair live otherwise minute let catch breath explorer glad enough minute merchant eye already close allow hear trample eye snap open never sleep strange planet tell futilely merchant awake steady scream rumble terror explorer call native planet harm speak giant swoop moment grasp lift close monstrous ugliness merchant struggle violently course quite futilely talk yell explorer shake head reach projector listen blast blast phrase fool almost add explorer struggle keep self control swallow space monster move purposefully away cry merchant reach blaster plain sight afraid fall simple monster kill never trade planet never probably live day young specie happen trader kill native young accidentally target point estate powerful native brood enter present prison carefully burn away portion thick stiff cover obvious height suspend kill prison cage shudder lift upward arc merchant roll lower rim startle awake cover lift light flood case two specimen young different appearance adult specie reflect explorer course considerably small handful reedy green stalk stuff bar odor unpleasant carry clod soil end merchant draw away say huskily explorer say try feed we judge least seem native equivalent grass cover replace set swinge alone fodder iv slim start sound footstep brighten turn red say around eye peel bet red say ssh stuff stick cage get scoot back house slim reach reluctantly ground meat holy smoke ever see ground meat get send house instead come back stupid grass slim hurt eat grass besides ground meat loose come cellophane color sure city grind always color till cook mean cook slim draw away quickly red look disgust animal eat cook food hurt much back house dad father walk around maybe look maybe cook tell take meat anyway come cook take stuff crab wonder let drink water dad make slim take large glob meat skin crawl touch turn toward barn red speed away direction slow approach two adult take deep breath bring back normal carefully nonchalantly saunter past walk general direction barn notice dead say hi dad hello sir industrialist say moment red question red turn carefully blank face father yes dad mother tell early morning real early dad little breakfast say tell awaken night back sleep red wait answer tell mom say yes sir awaken red see harm say dad sound thunder sort collision sort come sound hill truthful useful since direction almost opposite barn lay industrialist look guest suppose harm walk toward hill astronomer say ready red watch walk away turn see slim peer cautiously among briar hedge red wave slim step approach anything meat guess go hill search keep ask noise hear listen animal eat meat say slim cautiously sort look smell something okay red say guess eat holy smoke get eat something let walk along toward hill dad father go animal right fellow spend water sure drank lunch bring fruit anything eat fruit together trot rise red usual lead v astronomer say noise ship land dead perhaps industrialist frown land alive frown astronomer say understand friendly oh speak speak call reconnaissance next step invasion ship sir fleet tell size size matter handweapon superior artillery mean partly mind first industrialist go reason agree receive letter agree unsettle impossible trade judge real purpose count evade meet sigh suppose fault right rate world peace long lose healthy sense suspicion astronomer mild voice rise unusual pitch say speak reason suppose possibly hostile small yes important reflection fact native world small world normal gravity much high gravitational potential atmosphere dense support comfortably sustain period similar reason world base interstellar travel except trade certain item uneconomical important difference chemistry life due basic difference soil eat food surely overcome bring food build dome station lower air pressure devise specially design ship glibly describe feat easy race youth simply million world suitable galaxy need information able check independently astronomer true let hear walk sir consider long astronomer believe two general class planetary body exist first planet form distance far enough stellar nucleus become cool enough capture hydrogen large planet rich hydrogen ammonia methane example giant outer planet second class include planet form near stellar center high temperature impossible capture much hydrogen small planet comparatively poor hydrogen rich oxygen type since live solar system detail however reasonable we assume two planetary class another yes super dense class small poor hydrogen inner planet solar system ratio occurrence hydrogen ammonia planet super dense water oxygen world entire galaxy remember actually conduct survey significant sample volume galaxy without interstellar travel leave seven million super dense world exploration colonization industrialist look blue sky green cover tree among make say world astronomer say softly first solar system find contain apparently development solar system unique follow ordinary rule industrialist consider amount creature space asteroid dweller asteroid something else occur tell eight stellar system completely different discuss astronomer change fact quote unsupported statement restrict bald item information present theory stellar evolution accept nearly valid anything astronomy ever able devise except possible lose theory date beforethewar mind theory rigidly mathematical development predict galaxy describe world wish land hungry certainly land reason true creature intelligent reasonable forefather presumably intelligent yet certainly reasonable reasonable destroy almost tremendous civilization atomic warfare cause historian long accurately determine industrialist brood drop first atom bomb island forget ancient name end sight plain sight yet event allow proceed end look say briskly wonder fool errand astronomer little advance voice come thickly fool errand sir vi red slim trail elder experience youth aid absorption anxiety father view final object search somewhat obscure underbrush behind remain red say holy smoke shiny silver something slim really excite catch space ship father come big astronomer world father call space ship land estate talk dad come tell hear thunder besides space ship sure round thing port rocket tube much slim flush say read father book old book beforethewar huh make book beforethewar father teach university job voice rise red pull hear we whisper indignantly space ship slim mean ship another world get father go round round interested anything else world world everywhere planet world star probably planet probably zillion planet red feel outweigh outnumber mutter crazy right show hey go go father suppose believe tell suppose believe professor astronomy know scramble upright red say hey we suppose start ask question animal care say crazy snitcher promise go fault start argument say crazy back grumble red right well slim disappoint want space ship close quarter break vow secrecy spirit without least excuse personal insult red say awfully small space ship sure probably scout ship bet dad old much slim realize true weak point argument make answer interest absorb adult red rise foot elaborate attitude boredom guess well go business spend day look old space ship whatever get care animal go circus folk first rule circus folk get care animal finish virtuously aim anyway slim say red get plenty meat let watch fun watch besides dad father go away guess lunch red become argumentative slim start act suspicious go start investigate holy smoke ever read detective story try work big deal without catch practically main keep act always suspect anything first law oh right slim rise resentfully moment circus appear rather tawdry shoddy substitute glory astronomy wonder fall red silly scheme slope go slim usual rear vii industrialist say workmanship get never see construction good say astronomer bitterly nothing leave second land ship detect life planet accident explore party close necessary establish fact super dense world exist solar system quarrel crash land ship hardly seem damage survive ship repair survive trade case different disturb case enter house industrialist greet wife calmly lunch ready dear afraid look hesitantly astronomer anything wrong ask industrialist sure guest mind little family discussion pray pay attention whatever mutter astronomer move miserably end live room woman say low hurry tone really dear cook upset soothe hour honestly red do do industrialist amuse otherwise take united effort son month argue wife use name red rather perfectly ridiculous view youngster fashion name real say take chop meat eaten hope raw slight idea see since breakfast meanwhile cook furious catch vanish kitchen door bowl chop meat empty go lunch cook change lunch menu mean worth live week speak red dear promise thing kitchen hurt apologize cook oh work we complain change lunch menu double work make talk quit good cook easy remember strong argument industrialist look vaguely say suppose right suppose come talk well start come red walk house say cheerfully lunch guess look parent quick speculation fix stare say get clean first make door industrialist say moment son sir little friend red say carelessly around somewhere sort walk look around perfectly true red feel safe ground tell lunch say suppose lunch say get get back house say yes go creek look around astronomer interrupt voluble story look magazine sightlessly rummage worry youngster quite self reliant wait lunch lunch ready case doctor industrialist turn son talk son reason something happen ingredient anything sir hate explain fully chop meat chop meat chop meat wait patiently red say sort hungry prompt father raw meat sir sort need exactly red look miserable remain silent astronomer break mind put word remember breakfast son come animal eat oh right stupid forget red animal pet get red recover indignant breath say mean slim come say animal come say say animal simply ask animal eat promise foolishness try something without permission give away happen steal animal direct question yes sir whisper low hardly hear right rid understand red mother intervene mean keep meat eat animal red bite blood poison small one quaver red hardly budge touch many two industrialist touch arm chivvy child say low voice say rid punishment enough dismiss matter mind viii lunch half slim dash dine room moment stand abash say almost hysteria get speak red get something red look fright astronomer say son polite keep lunch wait sorry father oh rate lad say industrialist wife speak red want damage do lunch get speak red alone slim insist enough say astronomer kind gentleness obviously manufacture benefit stranger beneath easily recognize edge seat slim eat someone look directly upon successful red catch eye make soundless word animal loose slim shake head slightly whisper astronomer look hard slim falter stop lunch red slip room microscopic motion slim follow walk silence creek red turn fiercely upon companion idea tell dad feed animal slim say ask feed animal say besides something else red red use grievance anyway think come house act fault try shut second let talk fellow chance get much try go back space ship folk anymore want space ship say red sullenly nothing lose look inside port look inside dead look sick dead dead slim screech animal animal animal thing planet moment red turn stone occur disbelieve slim point slim look genuinely bearer tiding say finally oh go golly whopping shiver well turn loose say red we talk language another planet yes remember father talk stuff mother room talk visitor talk mind telepathery something think make holy smoke mean holy smoke red look dad say rid let sort bury somewhere throw creek tell make animal say rid get say holy smoke dad panic leave slim heart thoroughly legalistic let right oh golly trouble break run toward barn unspeakable vision mind ix different look animal interesting horrible eye neutral little object seem watch active malevolence make noise say slim whisper barely audible guess talk something say red funny noise hear significance early make move toward neither slim canvas watch ground meat slim notice touch slim say go something find turn find fault whole watch join slim care find look we red say right think consequence inspire anyway reach cage door slim say wait red glad say bite get something look iron something right see think part maybe disintegrator gun read book beforethewar mostly space ship disintegrator gun point disintegratore point we till point red heart quite care hang around get disintegratore get father cowardy cat yellow cowardy cat care call name bother disintegratore wait fault make narrow spiral stair lead main floor barn stop head back away red mother move pant little exertion smile tight smile benefit slim capacity guest red red hide keep cook see run meat red quaver hello show nasty animal go rid right away despite imminent corporal punishment red feel something load fall least decision hand right anything look little animal think let keep take meat eat grass leave good nut berry cook never let anything ask lunch speak sheer momentum terror realize mother hear eye frozen pop cage scream thin pierce tone x astronomer say quiet burial point publicity hear scream entirely recover reach run run minute husband extract sense say finally barn bar industrialist quick movement direction say send hand shotgun never see anything little horrible beast describe red touch try feed hold feed meat red begin slim say industrialist say quickly boy do enough harm today march house word word interested anything hear red properly punish turn wife whatever animal kill add quietly youngster hear child hurt do anything really terrible find new pet astronomer speak difficulty pardon describe animal shake head quite beyond word sorry say industrialist apologetically well care excuse moment please moment say never see animal surely usual animal completely unique estate sorry let discuss except unique animal land night industrialist step away wife imply well barn sir industrialist stare moment turn suddenly quite uncharacteristically begin run astronomer follow woman wail rise unheeded behind xi industrialist stare look astronomer turn stare say astronomer doubt appear strange repulsive uncomfortable tired little sick seriously damage youngster treat treat scoop keep cage give grass raw meat eat speak little listen perhaps right away industrialist try grimace effort think youngster ignorant identity think suddenly mind quite aware know mean we accord view matter attempt attack attack think industrialist say aloud concentration yes come answer think arm revolt little creature cage lift metal object sudden hole top cage another roof barn hole rim char wood hope creature think difficult repair industrialist find impossible organize point direct think turn astronomer weapon possession let handle cage understand calm think come harm young intelligent specie xii twilight industrialist entirely miss evening meal remain unaware fact say really ship fly say astronomer sure back hope long say industrialist energetically keep part agreement move sky earth world accept entirely wrong doctor creature refuse harm child provocation receive admirable almost hate kid mine almost proud imagine seize creature feed try keep hide amazing gall red tell idea job circus strength imagine astronomer say youth xiii merchant say take soon half hour say explorer go lonely trip back remain seventeen crew dead ashe leave strange planet back limp ship burden control entirely merchant say good business stroke harm young one good term good term explorer think business merchant say line we close bad burn rocket blast stage game safe horrible look thing pleasant enough inside thought perfectly friendly believe immature first pick we call red provide explorer queer name monster make laugh actually feel bad leave exactly nearest something lose opportunity organization quite interpret circus say explorer briefly impertinent monstrosity do find wander native world find sleep field earth red tentacle six leg pseudopod xiv red watch ship red tentacle give nickname quiver regret lose opportunity last eye tip fill drift yellowish crystal equivalent earthly tear transcriber note etext produce space science fiction extensive research uncover evidence u copyright publication renew minor spell typographical error correct without note

let together isaac asimov illustrate engle transcriber note etext produce infinity february extensive research uncover evidence copyright publication renew kind peace endure century forget anything else scarcely know react discover kind war finally certainly elia lynn chief bureau robotic sure ought react finally find bureau robotic headquarter cheyenne line century old trend toward decentralization lynn stare dubiously young security officer washington bring news elia lynn large almost charmingly homely pale blue eye bulge bit man usually comfortable stare eye security officer remain calm lynn decide first reaction ought incredulity hell incredulity believe ease back chair say certain information security officer introduce ralph breckenridge present credential match softness youth full lip plump cheek flush easily guileless eye clothing line cheyenne suit universally air condition washington security despite everything center breckenridge flush say doubt suppose say lynn unable keep trace sarcasm tone particularly aware slightly stress pronoun reference enemy equivalent capitalization print cultural habit generation precede say east red soviet russians confuse since east red soviet especially russians much simple much precise traveler frequently report reverse appropriate language scarcely anyone give think thing quite comfortable casual hatred begin call cold war game almost good natured game unspoken rule kind decency lynn say abruptly disturb situation rise stand stare wall map world split two region faint edging color irregular portion leave map edge mild green small irregular portion right map border wash pink map change much century loss formosa gain east germany eighty year last territorial switch importance another change significant enough color two generation territory brood bloody red pure undefiled white neutrality color lynn see map side say say breckenridge well accustom fact course sir realize pleasant far ahead we robotic eye remain guileless ever hide knife edge word plunge deep lynn quiver impact course account chief robotic learn late security officer lose caste eye government robotic really fail struggle lynn expect political mercy lynn say wearily true far ahead we build humanoid robot sir yes matter fact build model experimental purpose ten year ago make ten year progress since lynn disturb wonder incredulity concern whole business really result wound pride fear job reputation embarrassed possibility yet force defense say young stalemate we never perfect every detail always ahead facet another facet another ahead we right robotic place great proportion effort robotic mean branch endeavor receive great share effort mean ahead force field research hyper atomic perhaps lynn feel distress statement stalemate perfect true enough great danger threaten world world depend stalemate perfect possible small unevennesse always exist balance far direction almost begin cold war side develop thermonuclear weapon war become unthinkable competition switch military economic psychological stay ever since always drive effort side break stalemate develop parry every possible thrust develop thrust parry something war possible either side want war desperately afraid side crucial discovery first hundred year side keep struggle process peace maintain hundred year byproduct continuously intensive research force field produce solar energy insect control robot side make begin understand mentalic name give biochemistry biophysic think side outpost moon mar mankind advance giant stride force draft necessary side decent humane possible among lest cruelty tyranny friend make side stalemate break war lynn say consult man opinion trustworthy lynn look disgust good lord robotic investigate clear death yes vouch trust humphrey carl laszlo position face kind attack launch matter else hear laszlo say breckenridge good pass yes think possibility robot invade exactly say breckenridge softly accept full truth think fact robot already invade laszlo grandson hungarian break call iron curtain comfortable suspicion feel thick set bald pugnacious graven forever snub face accent clear harvard almost excessively soft speak lynn conscious year administration long expert various phase modern robotic laszlo comfort receptacle complete knowledge lynn feel well mere presence lynn say scowl twist laszlo face ferociously far ahead we completely incredible mean produce humanoid tell human close quarter mean considerable advance robo mentalic personally involve say breckenridge coldly leave professional pride account exactly impossible ahead we laszlo shrug assure acquaint literature robotic approximately approximately really mean correct breckenridge ever visit side say laszlo shortly dr lynn lynn say either breckenridge say robotic visit side twenty five year ask question kind confidence indicate know answer matter second atmosphere heavy think discomfort cross laszlo broad face say matter fact hold conference robotic long twenty five year say breckenridge significant maybe say laszlo reluctantly something else bother none ever conference robotic none remember invite ask breckenridge lynn stare worried interpose quickly course breckenridge say refuse attendance type scientific conference hold say laszlo pace floor hear case chief say lynn breckenridge say put position return invitation afraid man talk much exactly seem lynn feel helpless conviction security story true steal else contact side robotic cross fertilize trickle researcher move direction strictly basis year date back day eisenhower khrushchev great many good motive honest appreciation supra national character science impulse friendliness hard wipe completely individual human desire expose fresh interesting outlook slightly stale notion greet other fresh interesting government anxious continue always obvious think learn tell little side gain exchange case robotic little carry conviction moreover know along lynn think darkly take complacent side do nothing publicly robotic tempt sit back smugly comfortable assurance superiority seem possible likely hide superior card trump hand proper laszlo say shakenly obvious line think carry conviction parrot lynn hard right anything complete horror come conviction ten humanoid robot somewhere united state carry fragment tc bomb tc race sheer horror bomb ery end tc total conversion sun long synonym total conversion make sun penny candle ten humanoid completely harmless separation simple act come together exceed critical mass lynn rise foot heavily dark pouch eye ordinarily lend ugly face savage foreboding prominent ever go we figure way mean tell humanoid human find humanoid quickly mutter laszlo later five minute together bark lynn breckenridge nod glad we sir bring back washington conference lynn raise eyebrow right wonder delay long convince replace forthwith chief bureau robotic confer washington suddenly wish earnestly exactly pass first presidential assistant secretary science secretary security lynn breckenridge five sit table dungeon underground fortress near washington presidential assistant jeffrey impressive handsome white haired trifle jowly fashion solid thoughtful unobtrusive politically presidential assistant ought speak incisively three question face we first humanoid go together second go together third stop together secretary science amberley nod convulsively dean northwestern engineering appointment thin sharp feature noticeably edgy forefinger trace slow circle table far together say suppose definite ask lynn sharply least month already security say lynn turn automatically breckenridge secretary security macalaster intercept glance macalaster say information reliable let breckenridge apparent youth fool dr lynn part value we actually department ten year moscow nearly year without none terrible danger know we detail crucial one say lynn macalaster security smile frostily heavy chin close set eye know public almost nothing else say finitely human dr lynn agent breckenridge do great deal presidential assistant jeffrey cut let we certain amount action instant necessary happen seem likely wait specific know place perhaps become self evident go tc target cripple we much possible seem major city case major metropolis target worth tc bomb four possibility washington administrative center new york financial center detroit pittsburgh two chief industrial center macalaster security say vote new york administration industry decentralize point destruction particular city prevent instant retaliation new york ask amberly science perhaps sharply intend finance decentralize question morale intend destroy resist induce surrender sheer horror first blow great destruction human life new york metropolitan area pretty cold blooded mutter lynn say macalaster security capable think mean final victory stroke presidential assistant jeffrey brush back white hair let assume bad let assume new york destroy winter preferably immediately serious blizzard communication bad disruption utility food supply fringe area serious effect stop amberley science find ten man two hundred twenty million awfully small needle awfully large haystack jeffrey shake head wrong ten humanoid among two hundred twenty million human difference say amberley science humanoid differentiate human sight probably look lynn lynn say heavily cheyenne pass human daylight say macalaster security physically sure advance mentalic procedure point reel micro electronic pattern brain focus positronic pathway robot lynn stare imply create replica human complete personality memory specific human being right base agent breckenridge finding yes evidence dispute lynn bent head think moment say ten man united state man humanoid original available oriental easy spot east european introduce country radar network entire world border tight drum introduce individual human humanoid without know macalaster security say do certain legitimate seepage across border businessman pilot tourist watch course side ten kidnap use model humanoid humanoid send back place since expect substitution pass we americans begin difficulty get country simple friend family difference assume believe wait report imply sudden attack amnesia troublesome change personality check thousand amberley science stare finger tip ordinary measure work attack bureau robotic depend chief bureau eye turn sharply expectantly lynn lynn feel bitterness rise seem conference come intend nothing say say sure solution problem pregnant suggestion device record device part man gravely fear defeat wish responsibility place clearly unequivocally someone else yet justice robotic fallen short lynn lynn merely lynn robotic responsibility say spend wakeful night haggardness body soul seek attain another interview presidential assistant jeffrey next morning breckenridge lynn prefer private conference justice situation obvious breckenridge attain enormous influence government result successful intelligence work lynn say sir consider possibility hop uselessly enemy pipe sure however impatient public grow time however legislator sometimes expedient talk government least recognize world stalemate beneficial recognize ten humanoid tc bomb trivial break stalemate destruction fifteen million human being scarcely trivial world power standpoint demoralize we we surrender cripple we convince we win old planetary death war side avoid long successfully accomplish force we fight minus city enough suggest say jeffrey coldly ten humanoid country tc bomb wait together agree thing perhaps reason great mid winter bomb madness physical destruction result humanoid get together bad happen we moral intellectual destruction come due respect agent breckenridge intend we humanoid humanoid never suppose together merely remain separate order we something worry measure already take humanoid suppose security go file citizen ever across border close enough kidnap possible since macalaster mention yesterday follow suspicious psychiatric case else jeffrey say small ray device instal key place large city mass arena instance ten humanoid slip among hundred thousand spectator football game air polo match exactly concert hall church start somewhere particularly panic avoid say lynn public realize unpredictable moment unpredictable city human content suddenly cease exist suppose obvious drive lynn say strenuously grow fraction national effort divert entirely nasty problem amberley call find small needle large haystack chase tail madly increase research lead point long catch surrender without chance snap finger retaliation consider news leak become involve counter measure begin guess panic we harm tc bomb presidential assistant say irritably heaven name suggest nothing say lynn call bluff live live gamble dare break stalemate sake bomb headstart impossible say jeffrey completely impossible welfare we largely hand nothing agree perhaps ray machine sport arena kind skin deep measure effective do aftermath bitter conclusion toss country away sake subtle line reason encourage nothingism fact counter gambit active indeed presidential assistant jeffrey look breckenridge young security officer hitherto calmly silent say talk possible future break stalemate stalemate break matter whether humanoid explode maybe bait divert we fact remain quarter century behind robotic fatal advance robotic surprise we war start answer divert entire force immediately crash program robotic research first problem humanoid call exercise robotic call prevention death fifteen million man woman child lynn shake head helplessly play hand we lure blind alley free advance direction jeffrey say impatiently guess breckenridge make suggestion channel government approve begin science conference science breckenridge say list every important scientist every branch natural science cheyenne point agenda advance robotic major specific sub head develop receive device electromagnetic field cerebral cortex sufficiently delicate distinguish protoplasmic human brain positronic humanoid brain jeffrey say hope willing charge conference consult obviously short sir agree charge lynn smile briefly matter responsibility responsibility clearly lynn robotic feel breckenridge really charge say agree breckenridge lynn return together cheyenne evening laszlo listen sullen mistrust lynn description come event laszlo say go chief start put five experimental model humanoid structure test procedure man twelve hour day three shift overlap get arrange conference go crowd red tape everything work halt breckenridge say temporary gain lose laszlo scowl bunch astrophysicist geochemist around help damn toward robotic view specialist field helpful sure detect brain wave differentiate human humanoid wave pattern set project anyway say breckenridge robotic young security agent say calmly study robotic access text material deal russian robotic russian top secret material advance anything lynn say ruefully we laszlo basis material breckenridge go suggest particular line investigation reasonably certain copy electromagnetic pattern specific human mind specific positronic brain perfectly exact duplicate make complicate positronic brain small enough fit human size skull hundred time less complex human brain pick overtone therefore advantage fact laszlo look impressed despite lynn smile grimly easy resent breckenridge come intrusion several hundred scientist non robotic specialty problem intriguing consolation least come quietly lynn find nothing sit office alone executive position grown merely titular perhaps help give picture creative scientist half world converge cheyenne breckenridge cool efficiency handle detail preparation kind confidence say let together lick let together come lynn quietly anyone watch lynn moment see eye blink slowly twice surely nothing whirling detachment keep calm feel right ought go mad seek breckenridge improvise quarter breckenridge alone frown anything wrong sir lynn say wearily everything right invoke martial law chief division opinion situation warrant division dictator chalk beauty decentralization rescind order immediately breckenridge take step forward washington hear ruin ruin anyway realize set role great villain american history let break stalemate nothing lose perhaps great deal gain laugh little wildly target division robotic eh breckenridge thousand man kill tc bomb capable wipe three hundred square mile micro second five hundred man great scientist peculiar position fight war brain shot surrender surrender impossible lynn hear understand humanoid pass security provision together get together help order scientist visit side breckenridge visit regularly make point strange robotic ten scientist place ten humanoid converge cheyenne ridiculous guess good breckenridge work unless know humanoid america call conference first place quite coincidence bring news humanoid suggest conference suggest agenda run show exactly scientist invite sure right ten include dr lynn cry breckenridge outrage poise rush forward lynn say move get blaster wait scientist ray monitor radioactivity two together without check five hundred clear blaster surrender ten humanoid sit breckenridge sit lynn say wait tired laszlo spell wait professor manuelo jiminez institute high study bueno air explode stratospheric jet travel three mile amazon valley simple chemical explosion enough destroy plane dr herman liebowitz explode monorail kill twenty injure hundred other similar manner dr auguste marin institut nucl onique montreal seven other die various stage journey cheyenne laszlo hurtle pale face stammer first news two hour lynn sit face breckenridge blaster hand laszlo say think nut chief right humanoid turn stare hate fill eye breckenridge warn warn leave intact study god cry lynn frenzy haste thrust blaster toward breckenridge fire security neck vanish torso fall head drop thud floor roll crookedly lynn moan understand think traitor nothing laszlo stand immobile mouth open moment incapable speech lynn say wildly sure warn sit chair unless equip build radio transmission breckenridge moscow real breckenridge oh god eleven laszlo manage hoarse squeak explode hang suppose sure other receive message safely destroy lord lord bring news realize truth shoot fast enough god know second beat laszlo say shakily least study bent put finger sticky fluid trickle mangle remain neck end headless body blood high grade machine oil illustration god watch nitroglycerine magnificent possession isaac asimov walter sill labor year unknown laboratory worker fifty make great discovery fame rich fate interference loom form unreliable character nature walter sill reflect reflect often life hard joyless survey dingy chemical laboratory grin cynically work dirty hole place live occasional ore analysis barely pay absolutely indispensable equipment other half worth perhaps work big industrial concern take life easy look window hudson river ruddie flame die sun wonder moodily whether last experiment finally bring fame success merely false alarm unlocked door creak open crack cheerful face eugene taylor burst view sill wave taylor body follow head enter laboratory hello old soak come loud carefree hail thing sill shake head exuberance wish foolish outlook life gene information thing bad need money need less money either demand taylor worry fifty worry get anything except bald head thirty keep beautiful brown hair chemist grin money yet gene new idea shape tell much show progress make taylor follow sill small table stand rack test tube half inch shiny metallic substance sodium mercury mixture sodium amalgam call explain sill point take bottle label ammonium chloride sol shelf pour little tube immediately sodium amalgam begin change loosely pack spongy substance observe sill ammonium amalgam ammonium radical nh act metal combine mercury wait action completion pour supernatant liquid ammonium amalgam stable inform taylor work fast grasp flask straw colored pleasant smell liquid fill test tube upon shake loosely pack ammonium amalgam vanish stead small drop metallic liquid roll bottom taylor gaze test tube open mouth happen liquid complex derivative hydrazine discover name ammonaline work formula yet matter point property dissolve ammonium amalgam drop bottom pure mercury ammonium solution taylor remain unresponsive sill wax enthusiastic implication go half towards isolate pure ammonium never do accomplish mean fame success nobel prize know else wow taylor gaze become respectful yellow stuff important snatch sill withhold finish mean gene get free metallic state far every evaporate ammonaline ammonium break everlaste ammonia hydrogen two week later epilogue previous scene enact taylor receive hurry emphatic call chemist friend appear laboratory flurry anticipation get get big think million really sill eye shone rapture work wrong angle explain heat solvent always break dissolve ammonium separate freeze work brine frozen slowly freeze fresh ice salt crystallize luckily ammonaline freeze degree centigrade require much cool point dramatically small beaker inside glass wall case beaker contain pale straw colored needle crystal cover top thin layer dullish yellow substance case ask taylor get fill argon keep ammonium yellow substance top ammonaline pure active react anything else helium type gas taylor marvel pound complacently smile friend back wait gene good yet taylor lead end room sill tremble finger point another airtight case contain lump metal gleam yellow sparkle glisten friend ammonium oxide nh form pass absolutely dry air free ammonium metal perfectly inert seal case contain quite bit chlorine instance yet reaction make cheaply aluminum yet look gold gold possibility explode taylor sweep country ammonium jewelry ammonium plate table ware million thing know many countless industrial application rich walt rich rich correct sill gently move towards telephone newspaper go hear go begin cash fame right taylor frown maybe well keep secret walt oh breathe hint process general idea besides safe patent application washington right sill wrong article paper usher hectic two day two throgmorton bankhead commonly know captain industry head acme chromium silver plate corporation doubt deserve title patient long suffer wife merely dyspeptic grouchy husband especially breakfast table breakfast table rustle morning paper angrily sputter bite butter toast ruin country point aghast big black headline say crazy bedbug satisfied joseph please plead wife get purple face remember high blood pressure doctor tell stop read news washington annoy listen dear cook doctor damn fool shout throgmorton bankhead read news please purple face raise cup coffee mouth take critical sip eye fall upon insignificant headline towards bottom page savant discover gold substitute coffee cup remain air scan article quickly new metal run part claim discoverer far superior chromium nickel silver plate purpose besides ideal material cheap beautiful jewelry twenty dollar week clerk say professor sill eat ammonium plate impressive appearance gold plate indian nabob throgmorton bankhead stop read vision ruin acme chromium silver plate corporation dance eye dance cup coffee drop hand splash hot liquid trouser wife rise foot alarm joseph nothing bankhead shout nothing god sake away strode angrily room leave wife search paper vain anything disturb bob tavern fifteenth street usually pretty fill time morning speak empty except four five rather poorly dress man cluster portly dignify form peter hornswoggle eminent ex congressman peter hornswoggle usual speak fluently subject usual concern life congressman remember case point say argument bring house answer follow eminent gentleman nevada statement overlook important aspect problem realize interest entire nation apple parer country attend promptly gentleman welfare apple parer depend future entire fruit industry fruit industry base entire economy great glorious nation united state america hornswoggle pause swallow half pint beer smile triumph hesitation say gentleman statement entire house burst wild tumultuous applause assemble listener shake head slowly marvel great able spiel senator musta sensation yeah agree bartender dirty shame beat last election ex congressman wince dignify tone begin reliably inform bribery campaign reach unprecedented prop voice die away suddenly catch sight certain article newspaper listener snatch read silence thereupon eye gleam sudden idea friend say turn press work do immediately city hall leant whisper barkeeper get twenty five cent leave wallet mayor office mistake surely repay tomorrow clutch quarter reluctantly give peter hornswoggle leave small dimly light room somewhere lower reach first avenue michael maguire know police far euphonious name mike slug clean trusty revolver hum tuneless song door open crack mike look slappy yeh short wizene person sidle brung ya de evenin sheet de cop tinkin bragoni pull de job yeh good bent unconcernedly revolver anything else naw dippy dame kill dat toss newspaper mike leave mike lean back flip page bore manner headline attract eye read short article follow finish throw aside paper light cigarette heavy think open door hey slappy mere job get do night trouble walter sill happy deliriously walk laboratory king survey strut peacock bask new find glory eugene taylor sit watch scarcely less happy famous taylor want million dollar go sell secret ammonium metal fat land practical detail walt get touch staple eagle steel today decent price bell rang sill jump run open door home walter sill large scowl visitor gaze superciliously yes sill wish yes name throgmorton bankhead represent acme chromium silver plate corporation moment discussion right right eugene taylor associate speak freely bankhead seat heavily suppose surmise reason visit read new ammonium metal paper right whether truth story buy process sir sill lead magnate argon fill container gram pure ammonium metal right get oxide oxide metallic metal strangely enough oxide paper call substitute gold bankhead face show atom sink feel within view oxide dismay open say let sill shake head mr bankhead first sample ammonium ammonium oxide ever exist museum piece easily wish expect sink money satisfy willing buy patent much oh thousand dollar thousand dollar exclaim sill taylor together fair price gentleman million shout taylor outrage tone discovery goldmine million indeed dream gentleman fact matter company track ammonium year point solve problem unfortunately beat we week wish buy patent order save company great deal annoyance realize course refuse price ahead manufacture metal use process sue say taylor get money long protract expensive lawsuit bankhead smile nastily prove however unreasonable price two thousand hear price answer taylor stonily nothing right gentleman bankhead walk towards door sure open door reveal symmetrical form peter hornswoggle bent rapt concentration keyhole bankhead sneer audibly ex congressman jump foot consternation bow rapidly two three time anything well financier pass disdainfully hornswoggle enter slam door behind face two bewilder friend dear sir malefactor great wealth economic royalist type predatory interest ruination country quite right refuse offer place hand ample chest smile benignantly devil rasp taylor suddenly recover initial surprise hornswoggle take aback er peter quintus hornswoggle surely house representative last year never hear bless read paper wonderful discovery place service foot service two man world new invention prey every self seek unscrupulous person come along bankhead instance practical affair experience world inestimable handle affair attend detail nothing course eh taylor ask sardonically hornswoggle cough convulsively naturally think small interest discovery fittingly assign sill remain silent rise foot suddenly hear call police professor sill pray excite hornswoggle retreat uneasily towards door taylor hold open pass protest swear softly door slam face sill sink wearily nearest chair gene offer two thousand week ago beyond anything hope forget fellow bluff listen go right call staple sell ought plenty trouble bankhead staple worry pat shoulder trouble practically unfortunately however taylor wrong trouble begin across street furtive figure beady eye peer upturned coat collar survey house carefully curious policeman identify slappy egan bother slappy remain unmoleste cripe mutter dis gon na cinch de whole woik bottom floor back window jimmy wid toot pick alarm nuttin chuckle walk away slappy alone idea peter hornswoggle walk away find strange thought wander massive cranium thought involve certain amount unorthodox action throgmorton bankhead likewise active belong virile class know getter scrupulous get certainly intend pay million dollar secret ammonium find necessary call certain acquaintance acquaintance useful bit unsavory bankhead find advisable careful cautious visit however conversation ensue end pleasing manner walter sill snap uneasy sleep startle suddenness listen anxiously lean nudge taylor reward incoherent snuffle gene gene wake eh bother shut listen hear hear anything alone sill put finger lip quiet distinct shuffle noise laboratory taylor eye widen sleep leave entirely burglar whisper two crept bed don bathrobe slipper tiptoe door taylor revolver take lead descend stair traverse perhaps half flight sudden surprised shout follow series loud thresh noise continue moment loud crash glassware ammonium cry sill stricken voice rush headlong stair evade taylor clutch arm chemist burst laboratory follow closely curse associate click light two struggle figure blink owlishly sudden illumination separate taylor gun cover nice say two lurch foot amid tangle break beaker flask nursing cut wrist bent portly body dignify bow peter hornswoggle doubt say eye unwavere firearm nervously circumstance seem suspicious explain easily spite rough treatment receive make reasonable proposal feel great deal kindly interest two therefore world know iniquity mankind decide keep eye house tonight see neglect precaution house breaker judge surprise dastardly creature point flat nosed plug ugly remain floor daze creep back window immediately risk life limb follow criminal attempt desperately save great discovery really deserve great credit do sure valuable person deal reconsider answer early proposal taylor listen cynical smile certainly lie fluently continue great length great forcefulness burglar suddenly raise voice loud protest cripe boss dis fat slob tryin bad followin order boss fellow hire rifle safe oinin bit honest money plain safe crackin boss hurt den gettin de job warmin crawl dis little guy wid chisel blowtorch make de safe natur lly competition lay hornswoggle draw icy hauteur remain see whether word gangster take word truthfully eminent member great quiet shout taylor wave gun threateningly call police annoy story walt everything right sill return inspection laboratory knock empty glassware everything else unharmed good taylor begin choke dismay hallway cool individual hat draw eye enter revolver expertly handle change situation considerably grunt taylor drop gat weapon slip reluctant finger hit floor clank new menace survey four other sardonic glance two other try beat seem popular place sill taylor stare stupidly hornswoggle tooth chatter energetically first mobster move back uneasily mutter pete sake mike slug yeah mike rasp mike slug lot guy afraid pull trigger anytime baldy hand work stuff fake gold count five sill move slowly toward old safe corner mike step back carelessly room coat sleeve brush shelf small vial sodium sulphate solution totter fall sudden inspiration sill yell god watch nitroglycerine vial hit floor smash tinkle break glass involuntarily mike yell jump wild dismay taylor crash beautiful fly tackle sill lunge taylor fallen weapon cover two however long need begin confusion fade hurriedly night whence come taylor mike slug roll round round laboratory floor lock desperate struggle sill hop pray moment comparative quiet bring revolver sharp sudden contact gangster skull moment come suddenly mike lunge catch taylor stunningly chin jerk free sill yell consternation pull trigger flee figure shot wild mike escape unharmed sill make attempt follow sluice stream cold water bring taylor back sense shake head dazedly survey surround shamble whew say night sill groan go gene live danger never think possibility thief never tell discovery newspaper oh harm do weep listen first back sleep bother we tonight tomorrow bank put paper outline detail process vault do long ago staple close deal last live happily ever chemist shake head dolefully ammonium certainly prove upset far almost wish never hear almost rather back ore analysis unexpected surprise walter sill rattle cross town towards bank find reason change wish comfort homely jiggle ancient batter automobile fail cheer life characterize peaceful monotony enter period bedlam satisfied change rich poverty peculiar problem remark sententiously brake car two story marble edifice bank step carefully stretch cramp leg head revolve door right away two husky specimen human race step side sill feel hard object press painful intensity rib open mouth involuntarily reward icy voice ear quiet baldy deserve damn trick pull last night sill shiver subside recognize mike slug voice easily detail ask mike quick inside jacket pocket croak sill tremulously mike companion pass hand dexterously indicate pocket flick three four fold sheet foolscap dat mike hasty appraisal nod yeh get right baldy sudden shove two gangster jump car drive away rapidly chemist sprawl sidewalk kindly hand raise right manage gasp trip hurt find alone pass bank drop nearest bench near collapse doubt new life prepare taylor foresee possibility sort happen think car trail yet surprise fright almost ruin everything shrug thin shoulder take hat abstract fold sheet paper sweatband work five minute deposit vault immensely strong steel door swing shut feel relieve wonder mutter home follow instruction paper purse lip shake head go heck explosion sill arrive home three policeman pace leisurely sidewalk front house police guard explain taylor shortly trouble last night chemist relate event bank taylor nod grimly checkmate staple two hour police care thing afterwards shrug staple affair listen gene chemist put suddenly worried ammonium test plate ability important thing staple come pigeon milk hmm taylor stroke chin right staple come let plate something spoon suppose satisfaction really annoying sill complain fretfully troublesome hooligan proceed slipshod unscientific manner let eat dinner first mid day meal begin apparatus set feverish haste cubic vat foot saturate solution ammonaline pour old batter spoon cathode mass ammonium amalgam separate rest solution perforate glass partition anode three battery series provide current sill explain animatedly work principle ordinary copper plate ammonium ion electric current run attract cathode spoon ordinarily break unstable case dissolve ammonaline ammonaline slightly ionize oxygen give anode much theory let we happen practice close key taylor watch breathless interest moment effect visible taylor look disappoint sill grasp sleeve hiss watch anode sure enough bubble gas slowly form upon spongy ammonium amalgam shift attention spoon gradually notice change metallic appearance become dull silver color slowly lose whiteness layer distinct dull yellow build fifteen minute current run sill break circuit content sigh plate perfectly say good let sill aghast pure ammonium expose ordinary air water vapor dissolve nh oh drag rather bulky piece apparatus table say compress air container run calcium chloride dryer bubble perfectly dry oxygen safely dilute four time volume nitrogen directly solvent introduce nozzle solution beneath spoon turn slow stream air work magic almost lightning speed yellow coat begin glitter gleam shine almost ethereal beauty two man watch beat heart pant breath sill shut air watch wonderful spoon say nothing taylor whisper hoarsely let god beautiful reverent awe sill approach spoon grasp forcep withdraw surround liquid follow immediately never fully describe later excite newspaper reporter press unmercifully neither taylor sill least recollection happening next minute happen moment ammonium plate spoon expose open air horrible odor ever conceive assail nostril odor describe terrible broth hell plunge room sheer horrible nightmare strangle gasp sill drop spoon cough retch tear wildly throat mouth yell weep sneeze taylor pounce upon spoon look wildly odor grow steadily powerful wild exertion escape already succeed wreck laboratory upset vat ammonaline sill spoon go fly open window middle twelfth avenue hit sidewalk right foot policeman taylor care clothe burn sill gasp spray something laboratory anything strong smell burn sulphur liquid bromine tear clothe distraction realize someone walk unlocked door bell rung neither hear staple six foot lion man steel king step hall ruin dignity utterly collapse tear sob twelfth avenue treat spectacle elderly richly dress gentleman tear uptown fast foot carry shed much clothe dare spoon continue deadly work three policeman long since retire abject rout numb torture sense two innocent suffer cause entire mess come roar confuse shout street man woman pour neighbor house horse bolt fire engine clang street abandon rider squadron police come leave sill taylor finally give clothe trouser run pell mell hudson stop find neck deep water bless pure air taylor turn bewilder eye sill emit horrible odor say stable stable solid odor take vapor ever smell musk groan sill aroma indefinite period without lose appreciable weight something two ruminate silence wince whenever wind bring vagrant waft ammonium vapor taylor say low voice finally trace trouble spoon make afraid sue maybe throw jail sill face lengthen wish never see damn stuff bring nothing trouble torture spirit give sob loudly taylor pat back mournfully bad course discovery famous able demand price work industrial lab country cinch win nobel prize right sill smile counteract odor hope hope say taylor feelingly let back manage remove spoon transcriber note story appear july issue future fiction magazine produce greg week stephen blundell online distribute proofread team https www pgdp net youth isaac asimov red slim find two strange little animal morning hear thunder sound know never show new pet parent illustration spatter pebble window youngster stir sleep another awake sit stiffly bed second pass interpret strange surrounding home course country colder green window slim call hoarse urgent whisper youngster bound open window slim real name new friend meet day need slight figure slim add red red real name either appropriateness obvious friend instantly quick unquestione friendship young one yet quite adolescence first stain adulthood begin appearance slim cry hi red wave cheerfully blink sleep red keep croak whisper quiet wake somebody slim notice sun scarcely top low hill east shadow long soft grass wet slim say softly matter red wave slim dress quickly gladly confine morning wash momentary sprinkle little lukewarm water let air dry expose portion body run bare skin grow wet dewy grass red say get quiet mom wake dad dad hand catch death cold mimic voice tone faithfully slim laugh think never funny fellow red slim say eagerly every day red real early whole world red else around feel proud allow entrance private world red stare sidelong say carelessly hour hear last night hear thunder thunderstorm slim never sleep thunderstorm guess thunder hear go window rain star sky get sort almost gray mean slim never see nod think say red walk along grassy side concrete road split panorama right middle vanish among hill old red father red build crack rough spot red say keep secret sure red kind secret secret maybe maybe yet red break long supple stem fern pass methodically strip leaflet swung leave whip fashion moment wild charger rear champ iron control get tired toss whip aside stow charger away corner imagination future say circus around slim say secret know dad tell come secret fine secret ever circus oh sure bet anything well red watch corner eye ever circus mean good slim consider guess astronomer dad want huh astronomer say red slim feel door new private world close astronomy become dead star black empty space say placatingly circus fun say mean red grow argumentative suppose chance join circus right red affect scornful laughter slim sting join red whirl strange intense mean illustration mean slim step back bit surprised unexpected challenge get something we circus maybe someday circus big circus fellow world otherwise guess think let good old slim chance world strange glamorous slim say sure red huh red figure important circuse slim think desperately want right answer finally say acrobat holy smoke five step acrobat animal good side show big crowd main ring good act animal act doubt red voice everyone think anyone anyway find animal morning two get sure secret tell course okay get barn almost barn huge open door black black head slim stop track try word casual big fool big hurt long get cage barn slim see large cage suspend hook roof cover stiff canvas red say use bird something anyway away let loft clamber wooden stair red hook cage toward slim point say sort hole canvas red frown lift canvas look say relief canvas appear burn worried slim slim nod slowly sure want canvas jerk two red say small sort disgusting look animal move quickly canvas lift side toward youngster red poke cautious finger watch say slim agony hurt say red ever anything circus jump chance maybe small circus red look annoy let cage swung back forth pendulum fashion try back small worry right get worry get keep till circus come get figure feed meanwhile cage swung little trap creature clung bar gesture youngster queer quick motion almost intelligent ii astronomer enter dine room decorum feel much guest say youngster son room industrialist smile hour however breakfast force among woman ago nothing worry youth doctor youth youth word seem depress astronomer eat breakfast silence industrialist say really day look normal astronomer say afterward industrialist say pardon conceive play elaborate hoax really speak speak least sense project thought gather letter wonder ask course vague perhaps understand involve projector focusse think conscious attention part projector receptor quite realize try think projector part science we perhaps say industrialist yet change bring society think projector change good we old age change unwelcome say astronomer race old individual industrialist point window road build beforethewar exactly good day build possibly duplicate race young build eh yes least afraid new thing wish society beforethewar destroy doctor good youth new thing well world peaceful jog along race go nowhere nowhere prove man build road speak visitor agree race go nowhere say astronomer earnestly go toward final destruction university small student body year few book write less work do old sleep sun day peaceful unchange day find nearer death say industrialist dismiss listen write investigate position planetary economy find solvent interrupt industrialist smile yes oh joke yet perhaps joke far less solvent father less solvent father perhaps son long solvent become troublesome planet support industry exist toothpick oak tree beforethewar back village economy cave infusion fresh technological knowledge change new knowledge rather whole effect change broaden horizon sir choose approach matter rich influential government official unusual reputation day dare break tradition resist change handle youth race revive yes atomic bomb atomic bomb return astronomer need end civilization visitor mine atomic bomb whatever equivalent world survive bomb defeat we shell shock last chance reverse process illustration say industrialist friend space return astronomer hesitate say truthful denser planet rich light atom magnesium aluminum sir carbon hydrogen coal oil really astronomer say quickly go creature master space travel therefore atomic power coal oil answer industrialist smile good evidence yet truth story superficially atomic power seem preclude coal oil however quite apart energy gain combustion remain always remain basic raw material organic chemistry plastic dye pharmaceutical solvent industry exist without atomic age coal oil low price sell we trouble torture racial youth answer commodity dear offer gratis astronomer sigh say boy visible open window stand together grassy field lose animate conversation industrialist son point imperiously astronomer son nod make run toward house industrialist say youth speak race much ever yes age quickly pour mold slim scuttle room door bang behind astronomer say mild disapproval slim look surprise come halt beg pardon anyone sorry interrupt enunciation almost painfully precise industrialist say right youngster astronomer say enter empty room son cause slam door nonsense insist industrialist youngster do harm simply scold young view say slim lad slim advance slowly country eh much sir thank son show place yes sir red mean call red call two eh slim look away explore sir industrialist turn astronomer youthful curiosity adventure lust race yet lose slim say sir yes lad youngster take long get say red send something good eat exactly mean cook something good young uns eat oh sir mean animal animal yes sir animal eat astronomer say afraid son city breed say industrialist harm kind animal lad small sir grass leave nut berry probably trick thank sir slim run close door gently behind astronomer say suppose trap animal alive obviously perturb common enough shoot estate tame country full rodent small creature red always come home pet sort another rarely maintain interest long look wall clock friend iii sway halt dark explorer comfortable alien air feel thick soup breathe shallowly reach sudden need company merchant warm touch breathe rough move occasional spasm obviously asleep explorer hesitate decide wake serve real purpose rescue course penalty pay high profit unrestraine competition lead merchant open new planet ten year monopoly trade hug likely rent comer stiff price follow planet search secrecy preferably away usual trade route case little chance another ship within range subetheric except improbable coincidence ship rather cage explorer grasp thick bar blast away stick high open air leap bad land twice scout ship establish contact native grotesquely huge mild unaggressive obvious own flourish technology face consequence technology wonderful market tremendous world merchant especially take aback know figure express planet diameter distance two light second stand visi plate mutter unbelievable oh large world explorer say explorer easily impressed inhabit drop planet large ocean drown explorer smile gentle dig arcturian homeland small planet say quite merchant follow along line thought inhabitant large proportion world sound news strike less favorably nearly ten time height sure friendly hard friendship alien intelligence imponderable dangerous across group maintain equilibrium atomic war stage result introversion retreat gradual decadence increase gentleness monster principle remain explorer feel heavy throb engine frown say descend bit quickly speculation danger land hour planetary target huge oxygen water world lack size uninhabitable hydrogen ammonia planet low density make surface gravity fairly normal gravitational force fall slowly distance short gravitational potential high ship calculator run mill model design plot land trajectory potential range mean pilot manual control wiser install high power model mean trip outpost civilization lose perhaps lose secret merchant demand immediate land merchant feel necessary defend position say angrily explorer pilot know job land safely twice yes think explorer scout ship unmaneuverable freighter aloud say nothing keep eye visi plate descend quickly room doubt much quickly merchant say peevishly keep silence wish speak suggest strap floater help prepare ejector pilot fight noble fight beginner atmosphere abnormally high thick gravitational potential world whip burn ship last look bring control despite maintain course follow extrapolate line point northern continent toward head circumstance shade luck story eventually tell retell heroic masterly reversal lose situation within sight victory tired body tired nerve clamp control bar shade much pressure ship almost level dip room retrieve final error mile leave fall pilot remain post actual land think break force crash maintain spaceworthiness vessel survive ship buck madly soupy atmosphere ejector mobilize afterwards explorer lift unconsciousness rise foot definite feel merchant survivor perhaps calculation floater burn sufficiently distant surface fall stun merchant less luck surround world thick ropy stalk grass distance tree remind vaguely similar structure native arcturian world except low branch high consider normal tree top call voice sound basso thick air merchant answer explorer make toward thrust violently coarse stalk bar path hurt ask merchant grimace sprain something hurt walk explorer probe gently anything break walk despite pain rest first important ship spaceworthy repair live otherwise minute let catch breath explorer glad enough minute merchant eye already close allow hear trample eye snap open never sleep strange planet tell futilely merchant awake steady scream rumble terror explorer call native planet harm speak giant swoop moment grasp lift close monstrous ugliness merchant struggle violently course quite futilely talk yell explorer shake head reach projector listen blast blast phrase fool almost add explorer struggle keep self control swallow space monster move purposefully away cry merchant reach blaster plain sight afraid fall simple monster kill never trade planet never probably live day young specie happen trader kill native young accidentally target point estate powerful native brood enter present prison carefully burn away portion thick stiff cover obvious height suspend kill prison cage shudder lift upward arc merchant roll lower rim startle awake cover lift light flood case two specimen young different appearance adult specie reflect explorer course considerably small handful reedy green stalk stuff bar odor unpleasant carry clod soil end merchant draw away say huskily explorer say try feed we judge least seem native equivalent grass cover replace set swinge alone fodder iv slim start sound footstep brighten turn red say around eye peel bet red say ssh stuff stick cage get scoot back house slim reach reluctantly ground meat holy smoke ever see ground meat get send house instead come back stupid grass slim hurt eat grass besides ground meat loose come cellophane color sure city grind always color till cook mean cook slim draw away quickly red look disgust animal eat cook food hurt much back house dad father walk around maybe look maybe cook tell take meat anyway come cook take stuff crab wonder let drink water dad make slim take large glob meat skin crawl touch turn toward barn red speed away direction slow approach two adult take deep breath bring back normal carefully nonchalantly saunter past walk general direction barn notice dead say hi dad hello sir industrialist say moment red question red turn carefully blank face father yes dad mother tell early morning real early dad little breakfast say tell awaken night back sleep red wait answer tell mom say yes sir awaken red see harm say dad sound thunder sort collision sort come sound hill truthful useful since direction almost opposite barn lay industrialist look guest suppose harm walk toward hill astronomer say ready red watch walk away turn see slim peer cautiously among briar hedge red wave slim step approach anything meat guess go hill search keep ask noise hear listen animal eat meat say slim cautiously sort look smell something okay red say guess eat holy smoke get eat something let walk along toward hill dad father go animal right fellow spend water sure drank lunch bring fruit anything eat fruit together trot rise red usual lead astronomer say noise ship land dead perhaps industrialist frown land alive frown astronomer say understand friendly oh speak speak call reconnaissance next step invasion ship sir fleet tell size size matter handweapon superior artillery mean partly mind first industrialist go reason agree receive letter agree unsettle impossible trade judge real purpose count evade meet sigh suppose fault right rate world peace long lose healthy sense suspicion astronomer mild voice rise unusual pitch say speak reason suppose possibly hostile small yes important reflection fact native world small world normal gravity much high gravitational potential atmosphere dense support comfortably sustain period similar reason world base interstellar travel except trade certain item uneconomical important difference chemistry life due basic difference soil eat food surely overcome bring food build dome station lower air pressure devise specially design ship glibly describe feat easy race youth simply million world suitable galaxy need information able check independently astronomer true let hear walk sir consider long astronomer believe two general class planetary body exist first planet form distance far enough stellar nucleus become cool enough capture hydrogen large planet rich hydrogen ammonia methane example giant outer planet second class include planet form near stellar center high temperature impossible capture much hydrogen small planet comparatively poor hydrogen rich oxygen type since live solar system detail however reasonable we assume two planetary class another yes super dense class small poor hydrogen inner planet solar system ratio occurrence hydrogen ammonia planet super dense water oxygen world entire galaxy remember actually conduct survey significant sample volume galaxy without interstellar travel leave seven million super dense world exploration colonization industrialist look blue sky green cover tree among make say world astronomer say softly first solar system find contain apparently development solar system unique follow ordinary rule industrialist consider amount creature space asteroid dweller asteroid something else occur tell eight stellar system completely different discuss astronomer change fact quote unsupported statement restrict bald item information present theory stellar evolution accept nearly valid anything astronomy ever able devise except possible lose theory date beforethewar mind theory rigidly mathematical development predict galaxy describe world wish land hungry certainly land reason true creature intelligent reasonable forefather presumably intelligent yet certainly reasonable reasonable destroy almost tremendous civilization atomic warfare cause historian long accurately determine industrialist brood drop first atom bomb island forget ancient name end sight plain sight yet event allow proceed end look say briskly wonder fool errand astronomer little advance voice come thickly fool errand sir vi red slim trail elder experience youth aid absorption anxiety father view final object search somewhat obscure underbrush behind remain red say holy smoke shiny silver something slim really excite catch space ship father come big astronomer world father call space ship land estate talk dad come tell hear thunder besides space ship sure round thing port rocket tube much slim flush say read father book old book beforethewar huh make book beforethewar father teach university job voice rise red pull hear we whisper indignantly space ship slim mean ship another world get father go round round interested anything else world world everywhere planet world star probably planet probably zillion planet red feel outweigh outnumber mutter crazy right show hey go go father suppose believe tell suppose believe professor astronomy know scramble upright red say hey we suppose start ask question animal care say crazy snitcher promise go fault start argument say crazy back grumble red right well slim disappoint want space ship close quarter break vow secrecy spirit without least excuse personal insult red say awfully small space ship sure probably scout ship bet dad old much slim realize true weak point argument make answer interest absorb adult red rise foot elaborate attitude boredom guess well go business spend day look old space ship whatever get care animal go circus folk first rule circus folk get care animal finish virtuously aim anyway slim say red get plenty meat let watch fun watch besides dad father go away guess lunch red become argumentative slim start act suspicious go start investigate holy smoke ever read detective story try work big deal without catch practically main keep act always suspect anything first law oh right slim rise resentfully moment circus appear rather tawdry shoddy substitute glory astronomy wonder fall red silly scheme slope go slim usual rear vii industrialist say workmanship get never see construction good say astronomer bitterly nothing leave second land ship detect life planet accident explore party close necessary establish fact super dense world exist solar system quarrel crash land ship hardly seem damage survive ship repair survive trade case different disturb case enter house industrialist greet wife calmly lunch ready dear afraid look hesitantly astronomer anything wrong ask industrialist sure guest mind little family discussion pray pay attention whatever mutter astronomer move miserably end live room woman say low hurry tone really dear cook upset soothe hour honestly red do do industrialist amuse otherwise take united effort son month argue wife use name red rather perfectly ridiculous view youngster fashion name real say take chop meat eaten hope raw slight idea see since breakfast meanwhile cook furious catch vanish kitchen door bowl chop meat empty go lunch cook change lunch menu mean worth live week speak red dear promise thing kitchen hurt apologize cook oh work we complain change lunch menu double work make talk quit good cook easy remember strong argument industrialist look vaguely say suppose right suppose come talk well start come red walk house say cheerfully lunch guess look parent quick speculation fix stare say get clean first make door industrialist say moment son sir little friend red say carelessly around somewhere sort walk look around perfectly true red feel safe ground tell lunch say suppose lunch say get get back house say yes go creek look around astronomer interrupt voluble story look magazine sightlessly rummage worry youngster quite self reliant wait lunch lunch ready case doctor industrialist turn son talk son reason something happen ingredient anything sir hate explain fully chop meat chop meat chop meat wait patiently red say sort hungry prompt father raw meat sir sort need exactly red look miserable remain silent astronomer break mind put word remember breakfast son come animal eat oh right stupid forget red animal pet get red recover indignant breath say mean slim come say animal come say say animal simply ask animal eat promise foolishness try something without permission give away happen steal animal direct question yes sir whisper low hardly hear right rid understand red mother intervene mean keep meat eat animal red bite blood poison small one quaver red hardly budge touch many two industrialist touch arm chivvy child say low voice say rid punishment enough dismiss matter mind viii lunch half slim dash dine room moment stand abash say almost hysteria get speak red get something red look fright astronomer say son polite keep lunch wait sorry father oh rate lad say industrialist wife speak red want damage do lunch get speak red alone slim insist enough say astronomer kind gentleness obviously manufacture benefit stranger beneath easily recognize edge seat slim eat someone look directly upon successful red catch eye make soundless word animal loose slim shake head slightly whisper astronomer look hard slim falter stop lunch red slip room microscopic motion slim follow walk silence creek red turn fiercely upon companion idea tell dad feed animal slim say ask feed animal say besides something else red red use grievance anyway think come house act fault try shut second let talk fellow chance get much try go back space ship folk anymore want space ship say red sullenly nothing lose look inside port look inside dead look sick dead dead slim screech animal animal animal thing planet moment red turn stone occur disbelieve slim point slim look genuinely bearer tiding say finally oh go golly whopping shiver well turn loose say red we talk language another planet yes remember father talk stuff mother room talk visitor talk mind telepathery something think make holy smoke mean holy smoke red look dad say rid let sort bury somewhere throw creek tell make animal say rid get say holy smoke dad panic leave slim heart thoroughly legalistic let right oh golly trouble break run toward barn unspeakable vision mind ix different look animal interesting horrible eye neutral little object seem watch active malevolence make noise say slim whisper barely audible guess talk something say red funny noise hear significance early make move toward neither slim canvas watch ground meat slim notice touch slim say go something find turn find fault whole watch join slim care find look we red say right think consequence inspire anyway reach cage door slim say wait red glad say bite get something look iron something right see think part maybe disintegrator gun read book beforethewar mostly space ship disintegrator gun point disintegratore point we till point red heart quite care hang around get disintegratore get father cowardy cat yellow cowardy cat care call name bother disintegratore wait fault make narrow spiral stair lead main floor barn stop head back away red mother move pant little exertion smile tight smile benefit slim capacity guest red red hide keep cook see run meat red quaver hello show nasty animal go rid right away despite imminent corporal punishment red feel something load fall least decision hand right anything look little animal think let keep take meat eat grass leave good nut berry cook never let anything ask lunch speak sheer momentum terror realize mother hear eye frozen pop cage scream thin pierce tone astronomer say quiet burial point publicity hear scream entirely recover reach run run minute husband extract sense say finally barn bar industrialist quick movement direction say send hand shotgun never see anything little horrible beast describe red touch try feed hold feed meat red begin slim say industrialist say quickly boy do enough harm today march house word word interested anything hear red properly punish turn wife whatever animal kill add quietly youngster hear child hurt do anything really terrible find new pet astronomer speak difficulty pardon describe animal shake head quite beyond word sorry say industrialist apologetically well care excuse moment please moment say never see animal surely usual animal completely unique estate sorry let discuss except unique animal land night industrialist step away wife imply well barn sir industrialist stare moment turn suddenly quite uncharacteristically begin run astronomer follow woman wail rise unheeded behind xi industrialist stare look astronomer turn stare say astronomer doubt appear strange repulsive uncomfortable tired little sick seriously damage youngster treat treat scoop keep cage give grass raw meat eat speak little listen perhaps right away industrialist try grimace effort think youngster ignorant identity think suddenly mind quite aware know mean we accord view matter attempt attack attack think industrialist say aloud concentration yes come answer think arm revolt little creature cage lift metal object sudden hole top cage another roof barn hole rim char wood hope creature think difficult repair industrialist find impossible organize point direct think turn astronomer weapon possession let handle cage understand calm think come harm young intelligent specie xii twilight industrialist entirely miss evening meal remain unaware fact say really ship fly say astronomer sure back hope long say industrialist energetically keep part agreement move sky earth world accept entirely wrong doctor creature refuse harm child provocation receive admirable almost hate kid mine almost proud imagine seize creature feed try keep hide amazing gall red tell idea job circus strength imagine astronomer say youth xiii merchant say take soon half hour say explorer go lonely trip back remain seventeen crew dead ashe leave strange planet back limp ship burden control entirely merchant say good business stroke harm young one good term good term explorer think business merchant say line we close bad burn rocket blast stage game safe horrible look thing pleasant enough inside thought perfectly friendly believe immature first pick we call red provide explorer queer name monster make laugh actually feel bad leave exactly nearest something lose opportunity organization quite interpret circus say explorer briefly impertinent monstrosity do find wander native world find sleep field earth red tentacle six leg pseudopod xiv red watch ship red tentacle give nickname quiver regret lose opportunity last eye tip fill drift yellowish crystal equivalent earthly tear transcriber note etext produce space science fiction extensive research uncover evidence copyright publication renew minor spell typographical error correct without note

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online

Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net



















YOUTH



_by_ ISAAC ASIMOV





    Red and Slim found the two strange little animals the morning after

    they heard the thunder sounds.
They knew that they could never show

    their new pets to their parents.
[Illustration]





There was a spatter of pebbles against the window and the youngster

stirred in his sleep.
Another, and he was awake.
He sat up stiffly in bed.
Seconds passed while he interpreted his

strange surroundings.
He wasn't in his own home, of course.
This was out

in the country.
It was colder than it should be and there was green at

the window.
"Slim!"
The call was a hoarse, urgent whisper, and the youngster bounded to the

open window.
Slim wasn't his real name, but the new friend he had met the day before

had needed only one look at his slight figure to say, "You're Slim."
He

added, "I'm Red."
Red wasn't his real name, either, but its appropriateness was obvious.
They were friends instantly with the quick unquestioning friendship of

young ones not yet quite in adolescence, before even the first stains of

adulthood began to make their appearance.
Slim cried, "Hi, Red!"
and waved cheerfully, still blinking the sleep

out of himself.
Red kept to his croaking whisper, "Quiet!
You want to wake somebody?"
Slim noticed all at once that the sun scarcely topped the low hills in

the east, that the shadows were long and soft, and that the grass was

wet.
Slim said, more softly, "What's the matter?"
Red only waved for him to come out.
Slim dressed quickly, gladly confining his morning wash to the momentary

sprinkle of a little lukewarm water.
He let the air dry the exposed

portions of his body as he ran out, while bare skin grew wet against the

dewy grass.
Red said, "You've got to be quiet.
If Mom wakes up or Dad or your Dad or

even any of the hands then it'll be 'Come on in or you'll catch your

death of cold.'"
He mimicked voice and tone faithfully, so that Slim laughed and thought

that there had never been so funny a fellow as Red.
Slim said, eagerly, "Do you come out here every day like this, Red?
Real

early?
It's like the whole world is just yours, isn't it, Red?
No one

else around and all like that."
He felt proud at being allowed entrance

into this private world.
Red stared at him sidelong.
He said carelessly, "I've been up for hours.
Didn't you hear it last night?"
"Hear what?"
"Thunder."
"Was there a thunderstorm?"
Slim never slept through a thunderstorm.
"I guess not.
But there was thunder.
I heard it, and then I went to the

window and it wasn't raining.
It was all stars and the sky was just

getting sort of almost gray.
You know what I mean?"
Slim had never seen it so, but he nodded.
"So I just thought I'd go out," said Red.
They walked along the grassy side of the concrete road that split the

panorama right down the middle all the way down to where it vanished

among the hills.
It was so old that Red's father couldn't tell Red when

it had been built.
It didn't have a crack or a rough spot in it.
Red said, "Can you keep a secret?"
"Sure, Red.
What kind of a secret?"
"Just a secret.
Maybe I'll tell you and maybe I won't.
I don't know

yet."
Red broke a long, supple stem from a fern they passed,

methodically stripped it of its leaflets and swung what was left

whip-fashion.
For a moment, he was on a wild charger, which reared and

champed under his iron control.
Then he got tired, tossed the whip aside

and stowed the charger away in a corner of his imagination for future

use.
He said, "There'll be a circus around."
Slim said, "That's no secret.
I knew that.
My Dad told me even before we

came here--"



"That's not the secret.
Fine secret!
Ever see a circus?"
"Oh, sure.
You bet."
"Like it?"
"Say, there isn't anything I like better."
Red was watching out of the corner of his eyes again.
"Ever think you

would like to be with a circus?
I mean, for good?"
Slim considered, "I guess not.
I think I'll be an astronomer like my

Dad.
I think he wants me to be."
"Huh!
Astronomer!"
said Red.
Slim felt the doors of the new, private world closing on him and

astronomy became a thing of dead stars and black, empty space.
He said, placatingly, "A circus _would_ be more fun."
"You're just saying that."
"No, I'm not.
I mean it."
Red grew argumentative.
"Suppose you had a chance to join the circus

right now.
What would you do?"
"I--I--"



"See!"
Red affected scornful laughter.
Slim was stung.
"I'd join up."
"Go on."
"Try me."
Red whirled at him, strange and intense.
"You meant that?
You want to go

in with me?"
[Illustration]



"What do you mean?"
Slim stepped back a bit, surprised by the unexpected

challenge.
"I got something that can get us into the circus.
Maybe someday we can

even have a circus of our own.
We could be the biggest circus-fellows in

the world.
That's if you want to go in with me.
Otherwise--Well, I guess

I can do it on my own.
I just thought: Let's give good old Slim a

chance."
The world was strange and glamorous, and Slim said, "Sure thing, Red.
I'm in!
What is it, huh, Red?
Tell me what it is."
"Figure it out.
What's the most important thing in circuses?"
Slim thought desperately.
He wanted to give the right answer.
Finally,

he said, "Acrobats?"
"Holy Smokes!
I wouldn't go five steps to look at acrobats."
"I don't know then."
"Animals, that's what!
What's the best side-show?
Where are the biggest

crowds?
Even in the main rings the best acts are animal acts."
There was

no doubt in Red's voice.
"Do you think so?"
"Everyone thinks so.
You ask anyone.
Anyway, I found animals this

morning.
Two of them."
"And you've got them?"
"Sure.
That's the secret.
Are you telling?"
"Of course not."
"Okay.
I've got them in the barn.
Do you want to see them?"
They were almost at the barn; its huge open door black.
Too black.
They

had been heading there all the time.
Slim stopped in his tracks.
He tried to make his words casual.
"Are they big?"
"Would I fool with them if they were big?
They can't hurt you.
They're

only about so long.
I've got them in a cage."
They were in the barn now and Slim saw the large cage suspended from a

hook in the roof.
It was covered with stiff canvas.
Red said, "We used to have some bird there or something.
Anyway, they

can't get away from there.
Come on, let's go up to the loft."
They clambered up the wooden stairs and Red hooked the cage toward them.
Slim pointed and said, "There's sort of a hole in the canvas."
Red frowned.
"How'd that get there?"
He lifted the canvas, looked in,

and said, with relief, "They're still there."
"The canvas appeared to be burned," worried Slim.
"You want to look, or don't you?"
Slim nodded slowly.
He wasn't sure he wanted to, after all.
They might

be--



But the canvas had been jerked off and there they were.
Two of them, the

way Red said.
They were small, and sort of disgusting-looking.
The

animals moved quickly as the canvas lifted and were on the side toward

the youngsters.
Red poked a cautious finger at them.
"Watch out," said Slim, in agony.
"They don't hurt you," said Red.
"Ever see anything like them?"
"No."
"Can't you see how a circus would jump at a chance to have these?"
"Maybe they're too small for a circus."
Red looked annoyed.
He let go the cage which swung back and forth

pendulum-fashion.
"You're just trying to back out, aren't you?"
"No, I'm not.
It's just--"



"They're not too small, don't worry.
Right now, I've only got one

worry."
"What's that?"
"Well, I've got to keep them till the circus comes, don't I?
I've got

to figure out what to feed them meanwhile."
The cage swung and the little trapped creatures clung to its bars,

gesturing at the youngsters with queer, quick motions--almost as though

they were intelligent.
II



The Astronomer entered the dining room with decorum.
He felt very much

the guest.
He said, "Where are the youngsters?
My son isn't in his room."
The Industrialist smiled.
"They've been out for hours.
However,

breakfast was forced into them among the women some time ago, so there

is nothing to worry about.
Youth, Doctor, youth!"
"Youth!"
The word seemed to depress the Astronomer.
They ate breakfast in silence.
The Industrialist said once, "You really

think they'll come.
The day looks so--_normal_."
The Astronomer said, "They'll come."
That was all.
Afterward the Industrialist said, "You'll pardon me.
I can't conceive

your playing so elaborate a hoax.
You really spoke to them?"
"As I speak to you.
At least, in a sense.
They can project thoughts."
"I gathered that must be so from your letter.
How, I wonder."
"I could not say.
I asked them and, of course, they were vague.
Or

perhaps it was just that I could not understand.
It involves a projector

for the focussing of thought and, even more than that, conscious

attention on the part of both projector and receptor.
It was quite a

while before I realized they were trying to think at me.
Such

thought-projectors may be part of the science they will give us."
"Perhaps," said the Industrialist.
"Yet think of the changes it would

bring to society.
A thought-projector!"
"Why not?
Change would be good for us."
"I don't think so."
"It is only in old age that change is unwelcome," said the Astronomer,

"and races can be old as well as individuals."
The Industrialist pointed out the window.
"You see that road.
It was

built Beforethewars.
I don't know exactly when.
It is as good now as the

day it was built.
We couldn't possibly duplicate it now.
The race was

young when that was built, eh?"
"Then?
Yes!
At least they weren't afraid of new things."
"No.
I wish they had been.
Where is the society of Beforethewars?
Destroyed, Doctor!
What good were youth and new things?
We are better

off now.
The world is peaceful and jogs along.
The race goes nowhere but

after all, there is nowhere to go.
_They_ proved that.
The men who built

the road.
I will speak with your visitors as I agreed, if they come.
But

I think I will only ask them to go."
"The race is not going nowhere," said the Astronomer, earnestly.
"It is

going toward final destruction.
My university has a smaller student body

each year.
Fewer books are written.
Less work is done.
An old man sleeps

in the sun and his days are peaceful and unchanging, but each day finds

him nearer death all the same."
"Well, well," said the Industrialist.
"No, don't dismiss it.
Listen.
Before I wrote you, I investigated your

position in the planetary economy."
"And you found me solvent?"
interrupted the Industrialist, smiling.
"Why, yes.
Oh, I see, you are joking.
And yet--perhaps the joke is not

far off.
You are less solvent than your father and he was less solvent

than his father.
Perhaps your son will no longer be solvent.
It becomes

too troublesome for the planet to support even the industries that still

exist, though they are toothpicks to the oak trees of Beforethewars.
We

will be back to village economy and then to what?
The caves?"
"And the infusion of fresh technological knowledge will be the changing

of all that?"
"Not just the new knowledge.
Rather the whole effect of change, of a

broadening of horizons.
Look, sir, I chose you to approach in this

matter not only because you were rich and influential with government

officials, but because you had an unusual reputation, for these days, of

daring to break with tradition.
Our people will resist change and you

would know how to handle them, how to see to it that--that--"



"That the youth of the race is revived?"
"Yes."
"With its atomic bombs?"
"The atomic bombs," returned the Astronomer, "need not be the end of

civilization.
These visitors of mine had their atomic bomb, or whatever

their equivalent was on their own worlds, and survived it, because they

didn't give up.
Don't you see?
It wasn't the bomb that defeated us, but

our own shell shock.
This may be the last chance to reverse the

process."
[Illustration]



"Tell me," said the Industrialist, "what do these friends from space

want in return?"
The Astronomer hesitated.
He said, "I will be truthful with you.
They

come from a denser planet.
Ours is richer in the lighter atoms."
"They want magnesium?
Aluminum?"
"No, sir.
Carbon and hydrogen.
They want coal and oil."
"Really?"
The Astronomer said, quickly, "You are going to ask why creatures who

have mastered space travel, and therefore atomic power, would want coal

and oil.
I can't answer that."
The Industrialist smiled.
"But I can.
This is the best evidence yet of

the truth of your story.
Superficially, atomic power would seem to

preclude the use of coal and oil.
However, quite apart from the energy

gained by their combustion they remain, and always will remain, the

basic raw material for all organic chemistry.
Plastics, dyes,

pharmaceuticals, solvents.
Industry could not exist without them, even

in an atomic age.
Still, if coal and oil are the low price for which

they would sell us the troubles and tortures of racial youth, my answer

is that the commodity would be dear if offered gratis."
The Astronomer sighed and said, "There are the boys!"
They were visible through the open window, standing together in the

grassy field and lost in animated conversation.
The Industrialist's son

pointed imperiously and the Astronomer's son nodded and made off at a

run toward the house.
The Industrialist said, "There is the Youth you speak of.
Our race has

as much of it as it ever had."
"Yes, but we age them quickly and pour them into the mold."
Slim scuttled into the room, the door banging behind him.
The Astronomer said, in mild disapproval, "What's this?"
Slim looked up in surprise and came to a halt.
"I beg your pardon.
I

didn't know anyone was here.
I am sorry to have interrupted."
His

enunciation was almost painfully precise.
The Industrialist said, "It's all right, youngster."
But the Astronomer said, "Even if you had been entering an empty room,

son, there would be no cause for slamming a door."
"Nonsense," insisted the Industrialist.
"The youngster has done no harm.
You simply scold him for being young.
You, with your views!"
He said to Slim, "Come here, lad."
Slim advanced slowly.
"How do you like the country, eh?"
"Very much, sir, thank you."
"My son has been showing you about the place, has he?"
"Yes, sir.
Red--I mean--"



"No, no.
Call him Red.
I call him that myself.
Now tell me, what are you

two up to, eh?"
Slim looked away.
"Why--just exploring, sir."
The Industrialist turned to the Astronomer.
"There you are, youthful

curiosity and adventure-lust.
The race has not yet lost it."
Slim said, "Sir?"
"Yes, lad."
The youngster took a long time in getting on with it.
He said, "Red sent

me in for something good to eat, but I don't exactly know what he meant.
I didn't like to say so."
"Why, just ask cook.
She'll have something good for young'uns to eat."
"Oh, no, sir.
I mean for animals."
"For animals?"
"Yes, sir.
What do animals eat?"
The Astronomer said, "I am afraid my son is city-bred."
"Well," said the Industrialist, "there's no harm in that.
What kind of

an animal, lad?"
"A small one, sir."
"Then try grass or leaves, and if they don't want that, nuts or berries

would probably do the trick."
"Thank you, sir."
Slim ran out again, closing the door gently behind

him.
The Astronomer said, "Do you suppose they've trapped an animal alive?"
He was obviously perturbed.
"That's common enough.
There's no shooting on my estate and it's tame

country, full of rodents and small creatures.
Red is always coming home

with pets of one sort or another.
They rarely maintain his interest for

long."
He looked at the wall clock.
"Your friends should have been here by now,

shouldn't they?"
III



The swaying had come to a halt and it was dark.
The Explorer was not

comfortable in the alien air.
It felt as thick as soup and he had to

breathe shallowly.
Even so--



He reached out in a sudden need for company.
The Merchant was warm to

the touch.
His breathing was rough, he moved in an occasional spasm, and

was obviously asleep.
The Explorer hesitated and decided not to wake

him.
It would serve no real purpose.
There would be no rescue, of course.
That was the penalty paid for the

high profits which unrestrained competition could lead to.
The Merchant

who opened a new planet could have a ten year monopoly of its trade,

which he might hug to himself or, more likely, rent out to all comers at

a stiff price.
It followed that planets were searched for in secrecy

and, preferably, away from the usual trade routes.
In a case such as

theirs, then, there was little or no chance that another ship would come

within range of their subetherics except for the most improbable of

coincidences.
Even if they were in their ship, that is, rather than in

this--this--_cage_.
The Explorer grasped the thick bars.
Even if they blasted those away, as

they could, they would be stuck too high in open air for leaping.
It was too bad.
They had landed twice before in the scout-ship.
They had

established contact with the natives who were grotesquely huge, but mild

and unaggressive.
It was obvious that they had once owned a flourishing

technology, but hadn't faced up to the consequences of such a

technology.
It would have been a wonderful market.
And it was a tremendous world.
The Merchant, especially, had been taken

aback.
He had known the figures that expressed the planet's diameter,

but from a distance of two light-seconds, he had stood at the visi-plate

and muttered, "Unbelievable!"
"Oh, there are larger worlds," the Explorer said.
It wouldn't do for an

Explorer to be too easily impressed.
"Inhabited?"
"Well, no."
"Why, you could drop your planet into that large ocean and drown it."
The Explorer smiled.
It was a gentle dig at his Arcturian homeland,

which was smaller than most planets.
He said, "Not quite."
The Merchant followed along the line of his thoughts.
"And the

inhabitants are large in proportion to their world?"
He sounded as

though the news struck him less favorably now.
"Nearly ten times our height."
"Are you sure they are friendly?"
"That is hard to say.
Friendship between alien intelligences is an

imponderable.
They are not dangerous, I think.
We've come across other

groups that could not maintain equilibrium after the atomic war stage

and you know the results.
Introversion.
Retreat.
Gradual decadence and

increasing gentleness."
"Even if they are such monsters?"
"The principle remains."
It was about then that the Explorer felt the heavy throbbing of the

engines.
He frowned and said, "We are descending a bit too quickly."
There had been some speculation on the dangers of landing some hours

before.
The planetary target was a huge one for an oxygen-water world.
Though it lacked the size of the uninhabitable hydrogen-ammonia planets

and its low density made its surface gravity fairly normal, its

gravitational forces fell off but slowly with distance.
In short, its

gravitational potential was high and the ship's Calculator was a

run-of-the-mill model not designed to plot landing trajectories at that

potential range.
That meant the Pilot would have to use manual controls.
It would have been wiser to install a more high-powered model, but that

would have meant a trip to some outpost of civilization; lost time;

perhaps a lost secret.
The Merchant demanded an immediate landing.
The Merchant felt it necessary to defend his position now.
He said

angrily to the Explorer, "Don't you think the Pilot knows his job?
He

landed you safely twice before."
Yes, thought the Explorer, in a scout-ship, not in this unmaneuverable

freighter.
Aloud, he said nothing.
He kept his eye on the visi-plate.
They were descending too quickly.
There was no room for doubt.
Much too quickly.
The Merchant said, peevishly, "Why do you keep silence?"
"Well, then, if you wish me to speak, I would suggest that you strap on

your Floater and help me prepare the Ejector."
The Pilot fought a noble fight.
He was no beginner.
The atmosphere,

abnormally high and thick in the gravitational potential of this world

whipped and burned about the ship, but to the very last it looked as

though he might bring it under control despite that.
He even maintained course, following the extrapolated line to the point

on the northern continent toward which they were headed.
Under other

circumstances, with a shade more luck, the story would eventually have

been told and retold as a heroic and masterly reversal of a lost

situation.
But within sight of victory, tired body and tired nerves

clamped a control bar with a shade too much pressure.
The ship, which

had almost levelled off, dipped down again.
There was no room to retrieve the final error.
There was only a mile

left to fall.
The Pilot remained at his post to the actual landing, his

only thought that of breaking the force of the crash, of maintaining the

spaceworthiness of the vessel.
He did not survive.
With the ship bucking

madly in a soupy atmosphere, few Ejectors could be mobilized and only

one of them in time.
When afterwards, the Explorer lifted out of unconsciousness and rose

to his feet, he had the definite feeling that but for himself and

the Merchant, there were no survivors.
And perhaps that was an

over-calculation.
His Floater had burnt out while still sufficiently

distant from surface to have the fall stun him.
The Merchant might have

had less luck, even, than that.
He was surrounded by a world of thick, ropy stalks of grass, and in the

distance were trees that reminded him vaguely of similar structures on

his native Arcturian world except that their lowest branches were high

above what he would consider normal tree-tops.
He called, his voice sounding basso in the thick air and the Merchant

answered.
The Explorer made his way toward him, thrusting violently at

the coarse stalks that barred his path.
"Are you hurt?"
he asked.
The Merchant grimaced.
"I've sprained something.
It hurts to walk."
The Explorer probed gently.
"I don't think anything is broken.
You'll

have to walk despite the pain."
"Can't we rest first?"
"It's important to try to find the ship.
If it is spaceworthy or if it

can be repaired, we may live.
Otherwise, we won't."
"Just a few minutes.
Let me catch my breath."
The Explorer was glad enough for those few minutes.
The Merchant's eyes

were already closed.
He allowed his to do the same.
He heard the trampling and his eyes snapped open.
Never sleep on a

strange planet, he told himself futilely.
The Merchant was awake too and his steady screaming was a rumble of

terror.
The Explorer called, "It's only a native of this planet.
It won't harm

you."
But even as he spoke, the giant had swooped down and in a moment they

were in its grasp being lifted closer to its monstrous ugliness.
The Merchant struggled violently and, of course, quite futilely.
"Can't

you talk to it?"
he yelled.
The Explorer could only shake his head.
"I can't reach it with the

Projector.
It won't be listening."
"Then blast it.
Blast it down."
"We can't do that."
The phrase "you fool" had almost been added.
The

Explorer struggled to keep his self-control.
They were swallowing space

as the monster moved purposefully away.
"Why not?"
cried the Merchant.
"You can reach your blaster.
I see it in

plain sight.
Don't be afraid of falling."
"It's simpler than that.
If this monster is killed, you'll never trade

with this planet.
You'll never even leave it.
You probably won't live

the day out."
"Why?
Why?"
"Because this is one of the young of the species.
You should know what

happens when a trader kills a native young, even accidentally.
What's

more, if this is the target-point, then we are on the estate of a

powerful native.
This might be one of his brood."
That was how they entered their present prison.
They had carefully burnt

away a portion of the thick, stiff covering and it was obvious that the

height from which they were suspended was a killing one.
Now, once again, the prison-cage shuddered and lifted in an upward arc.
The Merchant rolled to the lower rim and startled awake.
The cover

lifted and light flooded in.
As was the case the time before, there were

two specimens of the young.
They were not very different in appearance

from adults of the species, reflected the Explorer, though, of course,

they were considerably smaller.
A handful of reedy green stalks was stuffed between the bars.
Its odor

was not unpleasant but it carried clods of soil at its ends.
The Merchant drew away and said, huskily, "What are they doing?"
The Explorer said, "Trying to feed us, I should judge.
At least this

seems to be the native equivalent of grass."
The cover was replaced and they were set swinging again, alone with

their fodder.
IV



Slim started at the sound of footsteps and brightened when it turned out

to be only Red.
He said, "No one's around.
I had my eye peeled, you bet."
Red said, "Ssh.
Look.
You take this stuff and stick it in the cage.
I've

got to scoot back to the house."
"What is it?"
Slim reached reluctantly.
"Ground meat.
Holy Smokes, haven't you ever seen ground meat?
That's

what you should've got when I sent you to the house instead of coming

back with that stupid grass."
Slim was hurt.
"How'd I know they don't eat grass.
Besides, ground meat

doesn't come loose like that.
It comes in cellophane and it isn't that

color."
"Sure--in the city.
Out here we grind our own and it's always this color

till it's cooked."
"You mean it isn't cooked?"
Slim drew away quickly.
Red looked disgusted.
"Do you think animals eat _cooked_ food.
Come on,

take it.
It won't hurt you.
I tell you there isn't much time."
"Why?
What's doing back at the house?"
"I don't know.
Dad and your father are walking around.
I think maybe

they're looking for me.
Maybe the cook told them I took the meat.
Anyway, we don't want them coming here after me."
"Didn't you ask the cook before you took this stuff?"
"Who?
That crab?
Shouldn't wonder if she only let me have a drink of

water because Dad makes her.
Come on.
Take it."
Slim took the large glob of meat though his skin crawled at the touch.
He turned toward the barn and Red sped away in the direction from which

he had come.
He slowed when he approached the two adults, took a few deep breaths to

bring himself back to normal, and then carefully and nonchalantly

sauntered past.
(They were walking in the general direction of the barn,

he noticed, but not dead on.)
He said, "Hi, Dad.
Hello, sir."
The Industrialist said, "Just a moment, Red.
I have a question to ask

you?"
Red turned a carefully blank face to his father.
"Yes, Dad?"
"Mother tells me you were out early this morning."
"Not real early, Dad.
Just a little before breakfast."
"She said you told her it was because you had been awakened during the

night and didn't go back to sleep."
Red waited before answering.
Should he have told Mom that?
Then he said, "Yes, sir."
"What was it that awakened you?"
Red saw no harm in it.
He said, "I don't know, Dad.
It sounded like

thunder, sort of, and like a collision, sort of."
"Could you tell where it came from?"
"It _sounded_ like it was out by the hill."
That was truthful, and

useful as well, since the direction was almost opposite that in which

the barn lay.
The Industrialist looked at his guest.
"I suppose it would do no harm to

walk toward the hill."
The Astronomer said, "I am ready."
Red watched them walk away and when he turned he saw Slim peering

cautiously out from among the briars of a hedge.
Red waved at him.
"Come on."
Slim stepped out and approached.
"Did they say anything about the meat?"
"No.
I guess they don't know about that.
They went down to the hill."
"What for?"
"Search me.
They kept asking about the noise I heard.
Listen, did the

animals eat the meat?"
"Well," said Slim, cautiously, "they were sort of _looking_ at it and

smelling it or something."
"Okay," Red said, "I guess they'll eat it.
Holy Smokes, they've got to

eat _something_.
Let's walk along toward the hill and see what Dad and

your father are going to do."
"What about the animals?"
"They'll be all right.
A fellow can't spend all his time on them.
Did

you give them water?"
"Sure.
They drank that."
"See.
Come on.
We'll look at them after lunch.
I tell you what.
We'll

bring them fruit.
Anything'll eat fruit."
Together they trotted up the rise, Red, as usual, in the lead.
V



The Astronomer said, "You think the noise was their ship landing?"
"Don't you think it could be?"
"If it were, they may all be dead."
"Perhaps not."
The Industrialist frowned.
"If they have landed, and are still alive, where are they?"
"Think about that for a while."
He was still frowning.
The Astronomer said, "I don't understand you."
"They may not be friendly."
"Oh, no.
I've spoken with them.
They've--"



"You've spoken with them.
Call that reconnaissance.
What would their

next step be?
Invasion?"
"But they only have one ship, sir."
"You know that only because they say so.
They might have a fleet."
"I've told you about their size.
They--"



"Their size would not matter, if they have handweapons that may well be

superior to our artillery."
"That is not what I meant."
"I had this partly in mind from the first."
The Industrialist went on.
"It is for that reason I agreed to see them after I received your

letter.
Not to agree to an unsettling and impossible trade, but to judge

their real purposes.
I did not count on their evading the meeting."
He sighed.
"I suppose it isn't our fault.
You are right in one thing, at

any rate.
The world has been at peace too long.
We are losing a healthy

sense of suspicion."
The Astronomer's mild voice rose to an unusual pitch and he said, "I

_will_ speak.
I tell you that there is no reason to suppose they can

possibly be hostile.
They are small, yes, but that is only important

because it is a reflection of the fact that their native worlds are

small.
Our world has what is for them a normal gravity, but because of

our much higher gravitational potential, our atmosphere is too dense to

support them comfortably over sustained periods.
For a similar reason

the use of the world as a base for interstellar travel, except for trade

in certain items, is uneconomical.
And there are important differences

in chemistry of life due to the basic differences in soils.
They

couldn't eat our food or we theirs."
"Surely all this can be overcome.
They can bring their own food, build

domed stations of lowered air pressure, devise specially designed

ships."
"They can.
And how glibly you can describe feats that are easy to a race

in its youth.
It is simply that they don't have to do any of that.
There

are millions of worlds suitable for them in the Galaxy.
They don't need

this one which isn't."
"How do you know?
All this is their information again."
"This I was able to check independently.
I am an astronomer, after all."
"That is true.
Let me hear what you have to say then, while we walk."
"Then, sir, consider that for a long time our astronomers have believed

that two general classes of planetary bodies existed.
First, the planets

which formed at distances far enough from their stellar nucleus to

become cool enough to capture hydrogen.
These would be large planets

rich in hydrogen, ammonia and methane.
We have examples of these in the

giant outer planets.
The second class would include those planets formed

so near the stellar center that the high temperature would make it

impossible to capture much hydrogen.
These would be smaller planets,

comparatively poorer in hydrogen and richer in oxygen.
We know that type

very well since we live on one.
Ours is the only solar system we know in

detail, however, and it has been reasonable for us to assume that these

were the _only_ two planetary classes."
"I take it then that there is another."
"Yes.
There is a super-dense class, still smaller, poorer in hydrogen,

than the inner planets of the solar system.
The ratio of occurrence of

hydrogen-ammonia planets and these super-dense water-oxygen worlds of

theirs over the entire Galaxy--and remember that they have actually

conducted a survey of significant sample volumes of the Galaxy which we,

without interstellar travel, cannot do--is about 3 to 1.
This leaves

them seven million super-dense worlds for exploration and colonization."
The Industrialist looked at the blue sky and the green-covered trees

among which they were making their way.
He said, "And worlds like ours?"
The Astronomer said, softly, "Ours is the first solar system they have

found which contains them.
Apparently the development of our solar

system was unique and did not follow the ordinary rules."
The Industrialist considered that.
"What it amounts to is that these

creatures from space are asteroid-dwellers."
"No, no.
The asteroids are something else again.
They occur, I was told,

in one out of eight stellar systems, but they're completely different

from what we've been discussing."
"And how does your being an astronomer change the fact that you are

still only quoting their unsupported statements?"
"But they did not restrict themselves to bald items of information.
They

presented me with a theory of stellar evolution which I had to accept

and which is more nearly valid than anything our own astronomy has ever

been able to devise, if we except possible lost theories dating from

Beforethewars.
Mind you, their theory had a rigidly mathematical

development and it predicted just such a Galaxy as they describe.
So you

see, they have all the worlds they wish.
They are not land-hungry.
Certainly not for our land."
"Reason would say so, if what you say is true.
But creatures may be

intelligent and not reasonable.
Our forefathers were presumably

intelligent, yet they were certainly not reasonable.
Was it reasonable

to destroy almost all their tremendous civilization in atomic warfare

over causes our historians can no longer accurately determine?"
The

Industrialist brooded over it.
"From the dropping of the first atom bomb

over those islands--I forget the ancient name--there was only one end in

sight, and in plain sight.
Yet events were allowed to proceed to that

end."
He looked up, said briskly, "Well, where are we?
I wonder if we are not

on a fool's errand after all."
But the Astronomer was a little in advance and his voice came thickly.
"No fool's errand, sir.
Look there."
VI



Red and Slim had trailed their elders with the experience of youth,

aided by the absorption and anxiety of their fathers.
Their view of the

final object of the search was somewhat obscured by the underbrush

behind which they remained.
Red said, "Holy Smokes.
Look at that.
It's all shiny silver or

something."
But it was Slim who was really excited.
He caught at the other.
"I know

what this is.
It's a space-ship.
That must be why my father came here.
He's one of the biggest astronomers in the world and your father would

have to call him if a space-ship landed on his estate."
"What are you talking about?
Dad didn't even know that thing was there.
He only came here because I told him I heard the thunder from here.
Besides, there isn't any such thing as a space-ship."
"Sure, there is.
Look at it.
See those round things.
They are ports.
And

you can see the rocket tubes."
"How do you know so much?"
Slim was flushed.
He said, "I read about them.
My father has books about

them.
Old books.
From Beforethewars."
"Huh.
Now I know you're making it up.
Books from Beforethewars!"
"My father _has_ to have them.
He teaches at the University.
It's his

job."
His voice had risen and Red had to pull at him.
"You want them to hear

us?"
he whispered indignantly.
"Well, it is, too, a space-ship."
"Look here, Slim, you mean that's a ship from another world."
"It's _got_ to be.
Look at my father going round and round it.
He

wouldn't be so interested if it was anything else."
"Other worlds!
Where are there other worlds?"
"Everywhere.
How about the planets?
They're worlds just like ours, some

of them.
And other stars probably have planets.
There's probably

zillions of planets."
Red felt outweighed and outnumbered.
He muttered, "You're crazy!"
"All right, then.
I'll show you."
"Hey!
Where are you going?"
"Down there.
I'm going to ask my father.
I suppose you'll believe it if

_he_ tells you.
I suppose you'll believe a Professor of Astronomy knows

what--"



He had scrambled upright.
Red said, "Hey.
You don't want them to see us.
We're not supposed to be

here.
Do you want them to start asking questions and find out about our

animals?"
"I don't care.
You said I was crazy."
"Snitcher!
You promised you wouldn't tell."
"I'm _not_ going to tell.
But if they find out themselves, it's your

fault, for starting an argument and saying I was crazy."
"I take it back, then," grumbled Red.
"Well, all right.
You better."
In a way, Slim was disappointed.
He wanted to see the space-ship at

closer quarters.
Still, he could not break his vow of secrecy even in

spirit without at least the excuse of personal insult.
Red said, "It's awfully small for a space-ship."
"Sure, because it's probably a scout-ship."
"I'll bet Dad couldn't even get into the old thing."
So much Slim realized to be true.
It was a weak point in his argument

and he made no answer.
His interest was absorbed by the adults.
Red rose to his feet; an elaborate attitude of boredom all about him.
"Well, I guess we better be going.
There's business to do and I can't

spend all day here looking at some old space-ship or whatever it is.
We've got to take care of the animals if we're going to be circus-folks.
That's the first rule with circus-folks.
They've got to take care of the

animals.
And," he finished virtuously, "that's what I aim to do,

anyway."
Slim said, "What for, Red?
They've got plenty of meat.
Let's watch."
"There's no fun in watching.
Besides Dad and your father are going away

and I guess it's about lunch time."
Red became argumentative.
"Look, Slim, we can't start acting suspicious

or they're going to start investigating.
Holy Smokes, don't you ever

read any detective stories?
When you're trying to work a big deal

without being caught, it's practically the main thing to keep on acting

just like always.
Then they don't suspect anything.
That's the first

law--"



"Oh, all right."
Slim rose resentfully.
At the moment, the circus appeared to him a

rather tawdry and shoddy substitute for the glories of astronomy, and he

wondered how he had come to fall in with Red's silly scheme.
Down the slope they went, Slim, as usual, in the rear.
VII



The Industrialist said, "It's the workmanship that gets me.
I never saw

such construction."
"What good is it now?"
said the Astronomer, bitterly.
"There's nothing

left.
There'll be no second landing.
This ship detected life on our

planet through accident.
Other exploring parties would come no closer

than necessary to establish the fact that there were no super-dense

worlds existing in our solar system."
"Well, there's no quarreling with a crash landing."
"The ship hardly seems damaged.
If only some had survived, the ship

might have been repaired."
"If they had survived, there would be no trade in any case.
They're too

different.
Too disturbing.
In any case--it's over."
They entered the house and the Industrialist greeted his wife calmly.
"Lunch about ready, dear."
"I'm afraid not.
You see--" She looked hesitantly at the Astronomer.
"Is anything wrong?"
asked the Industrialist.
"Why not tell me?
I'm sure

our guest won't mind a little family discussion."
"Pray don't pay any attention whatever to me," muttered the Astronomer.
He moved miserably to the other end of the living room.
The woman said, in low, hurried tones, "Really, dear, cook's that upset.
I've been soothing her for hours and honestly, I don't know why Red

should have done it."
"Done what?"
The Industrialist was more amused than otherwise.
It had

taken the united efforts of himself and his son months to argue his wife

into using the name "Red" rather than the perfectly ridiculous (viewed

youngster fashion) name which was his real one.
She said, "He's taken most of the chopped meat."
"He's eaten it?"
"Well, I hope not.
It was raw."
"Then what would he want it for?"
"I haven't the slightest idea.
I haven't seen him since breakfast.
Meanwhile cook's just furious.
She caught him vanishing out the kitchen

door and there was the bowl of chopped meat just about empty and she was

going to use it for lunch.
Well, you know cook.
She had to change the

lunch menu and that means she won't be worth living with for a week.
You'll just have to speak to Red, dear, and make him promise not to do

things in the kitchen any more.
And it wouldn't hurt to have him

apologize to cook."
"Oh, come.
She works for us.
If we don't complain about a change in

lunch menu, why should she?"
"Because she's the one who has double-work made for her, and she's

talking about quitting.
Good cooks aren't easy to get.
Do you remember

the one before her?"
It was a strong argument.
The Industrialist looked about vaguely.
He said, "I suppose you're

right.
He isn't here, I suppose.
When he comes in, I'll talk to him."
"You'd better start.
Here he comes."
Red walked into the house and said cheerfully, "Time for lunch, I

guess."
He looked from one parent to the other in quick speculation at

their fixed stares and said, "Got to clean up first, though," and made

for the other door.
The Industrialist said, "One moment, son."
"Sir?"
"Where's your little friend?"
Red said, carelessly, "He's around somewhere.
We were just sort of

walking and I looked around and he wasn't there."
This was perfectly

true, and Red felt on safe ground.
"I told him it was lunch time.
I

said, 'I suppose it's about lunch time.'
I said, 'We got to be getting

back to the house.'
And he said, 'Yes.'
And I just went on and then when

I was about at the creek I looked around and--"



The Astronomer interrupted the voluble story, looking up from a

magazine he had been sightlessly rummaging through.
"I wouldn't worry

about my youngster.
He is quite self-reliant.
Don't wait lunch for him."
"Lunch isn't ready in any case, Doctor."
The Industrialist turned once

more to his son.
"And talking about that, son, the reason for it is that

something happened to the ingredients.
Do you have anything to say?"
"Sir?"
"I hate to feel that I have to explain myself more fully.
Why did you

take the chopped meat?"
"The chopped meat?"
"The chopped meat."
He waited patiently.
Red said, "Well, I was sort of--"



"Hungry?"
prompted his father.
"For raw meat?"
"No, sir.
I just sort of needed it."
"For what exactly?"
Red looked miserable and remained silent.
The Astronomer broke in again.
"If you don't mind my putting in a few

words--You'll remember that just after breakfast my son came in to ask

what animals ate."
"Oh, you're right.
How stupid of me to forget.
Look here, Red, did you

take it for an animal pet you've got?"
Red recovered indignant breath.
He said, "You mean Slim came in here and

said I had an animal?
He came in here and said that?
He said I had an

animal?"
"No, he didn't.
He simply asked what animals ate.
That's all.
Now if he

promised he wouldn't tell on you, he didn't.
It's your own foolishness

in trying to take something without permission that gave you away.
That

happened to be stealing.
Now have you an animal?
I ask you a direct

question."
"Yes, sir."
It was a whisper so low as hardly to be heard.
"All right, you'll have to get rid of it.
Do you understand?"
Red's mother intervened.
"Do you mean to say you're keeping a

meat-eating animal, Red?
It might bite you and give you blood-poison."
"They're only small ones," quavered Red.
"They hardly budge if you touch

them."
"They?
How many do you have?"
"Two."
"Where are they?"
The Industrialist touched her arm.
"Don't chivvy the child any further,"

he said, in a low voice.
"If he says he'll get rid of them, he will,

and that's punishment enough."
He dismissed the matter from his mind.
VIII



Lunch was half over when Slim dashed into the dining room.
For a moment,

he stood abashed, and then he said in what was almost hysteria, "I've

got to speak to Red.
I've got to say something."
Red looked up in fright, but the Astronomer said, "I don't think, son,

you're being very polite.
You've kept lunch waiting."
"I'm sorry, Father."
"Oh, don't rate the lad," said the Industrialist's wife.
"He can speak

to Red if he wants to, and there was no damage done to the lunch."
"I've got to speak to Red alone," Slim insisted.
"Now that's enough," said the Astronomer with a kind of gentleness that

was obviously manufactured for the benefit of strangers and which had

beneath it an easily-recognized edge.
"Take your seat."
Slim did so, but he ate only when someone looked directly upon him.
Even

then he was not very successful.
Red caught his eyes.
He made soundless words, "Did the animals get

loose?"
Slim shook his head slightly.
He whispered, "No, it's--"



The Astronomer looked at him hard and Slim faltered to a stop.
With lunch over, Red slipped out of the room, with a microscopic motion

at Slim to follow.
They walked in silence to the creek.
Then Red turned fiercely upon his companion.
"Look here, what's the idea

of telling my Dad we were feeding animals?"
Slim said, "I didn't.
I asked what you feed animals.
That's not the same

as saying we were doing it.
Besides, it's something else, Red."
But Red had not used up his grievances.
"And where did you go anyway?
I

thought you were coming to the house.
They acted like it was my fault

you weren't there."
"But I'm trying to tell you about that, if you'd only shut _up_ a second

and let me talk.
You don't give a fellow a chance."
"Well, go on and tell me if you've got so much to say."
"I'm _trying_ to.
I went back to the space-ship.
The folks weren't there

anymore and I wanted to see what it was like."
"It isn't a space-ship," said Red, sullenly.
He had nothing to lose.
"It is, too.
I looked inside.
You could look through the ports and I

looked inside and they were _dead_."
He looked sick.
"They were dead."
"_Who_ were dead."
Slim screeched, "Animals!
like _our_ animals!
Only they _aren't_

animals.
They're people-things from other planets."
For a moment Red might have been turned to stone.
It didn't occur to him

to disbelieve Slim at this point.
Slim looked too genuinely the bearer

of just such tidings.
He said, finally, "Oh, my."
"Well, what are we going to do?
Golly, will we get a whopping if they

find out?"
He was shivering.
"We better turn them loose," said Red.
"They'll tell on us."
"They can't talk our language.
Not if they're from another planet."
"Yes, they can.
Because I remember my father talking about some stuff

like that to my mother when he didn't know I was in the room.
He was

talking about visitors who could talk with the mind.
Telepathery or

something.
I thought he was making it up."
"Well, Holy Smokes.
I mean--Holy Smokes."
Red looked up.
"I tell you.
My

Dad said to get rid of them.
Let's sort of bury them somewhere or throw

them in the creek."
"He _told_ you to do that."
"He made me say I had animals and then he said, 'Get rid of them.'
I got

to do what he says.
Holy Smokes, he's my Dad."
Some of the panic left Slim's heart.
It was a thoroughly legalistic way

out.
"Well, let's do it right now, then, before they find out.
Oh,

golly, if they find out, will we be in trouble!"
They broke into a run toward the barn, unspeakable visions in their

minds.
IX



It was different, looking at them as though they were "people."
As

animals, they had been interesting; as "people," horrible.
Their eyes,

which were neutral little objects before, now seemed to watch them with

active malevolence.
"They're making noises," said Slim, in a whisper which was barely

audible.
"I guess they're talking or something," said Red.
Funny that those

noises which they had heard before had not had significance earlier.
He

was making no move toward them.
Neither was Slim.
The canvas was off but they were just watching.
The ground meat, Slim

noticed, hadn't been touched.
Slim said, "Aren't you going to do something?"
"Aren't you?"
"You found them."
"It's your turn, now."
"No, it isn't.
You found them.
It's your fault, the whole thing.
I was

watching."
"You joined in, Slim.
You know you did."
"I don't care.
You found them and that's what I'll say when they come

here looking for us."
Red said, "All right for you."
But the thought of the consequences

inspired him anyway, and he reached for the cage door.
Slim said, "Wait!"
Red was glad to.
He said, "Now what's biting you?"
"One of them's got something on him that looks like it might be iron or

something."
"Where?"
"Right there.
I saw it before but I thought it was just part of him.
But

if he's 'people,' maybe it's a disintegrator gun."
"What's that?"
"I read about it in the books from Beforethewars.
Mostly people with

space-ships have disintegrator guns.
They point them at you and you get

disintegratored."
"They didn't point it at us till now," pointed out Red with his heart

not quite in it.
"I don't care.
I'm not hanging around here and getting disintegratored.
I'm getting my father."
"Cowardy-cat.
Yellow cowardy-cat."
"I don't care.
You can call all the names you want, but if you bother

them now you'll get disintegratored.
You wait and see, and it'll be all

your fault."
He made for the narrow spiral stairs that led to the main floor of the

barn, stopped at its head, then backed away.
Red's mother was moving up, panting a little with the exertion and

smiling a tight smile for the benefit of Slim in his capacity as guest.
"Red!
You, Red!
Are you up there?
Now don't try to hide.
I know this is

where you're keeping them.
Cook saw where you ran with the meat."
Red quavered, "Hello, ma!"
"Now show me those nasty animals?
I'm going to see to it that you get

rid of them right away."
It was over!
And despite the imminent corporal punishment, Red felt

something like a load fall from him.
At least the decision was out of

his hands.
"Right there, ma.
I didn't do anything to them, ma.
I didn't know.
They

just looked like little animals and I thought you'd let me keep them,

ma.
I wouldn't have taken the meat only they wouldn't eat grass or

leaves and we couldn't find good nuts or berries and cook never lets me

have anything or I would have asked her and I didn't know it was for

lunch and--"



He was speaking on the sheer momentum of terror and did not realize that

his mother did not hear him but, with eyes frozen and popping at the

cage, was screaming in thin, piercing tones.
X



The Astronomer was saying, "A quiet burial is all we can do.
There is no

point in any publicity now," when they heard the screams.
She had not entirely recovered by the time she reached them, running and

running.
It was minutes before her husband could extract sense from her.
She was saying, finally, "I tell you they're in the barn.
I don't know

what they are.
No, no--"



She barred the Industrialist's quick movement in that direction.
She

said, "Don't _you_ go.
Send one of the hands with a shotgun.
I tell you

I never saw anything like it.
Little horrible beasts with--with--I can't

describe it.
To think that Red was touching them and trying to feed

them.
He was _holding_ them, and feeding them meat."
Red began, "I only--"



And Slim said, "It was not--"



The Industrialist said, quickly, "Now you boys have done enough harm

today.
March!
Into the house!
And not a word; not one word!
I'm not

interested in anything you have to say.
After this is all over, I'll

hear you out and as for you, Red, I'll see that you're properly

punished."
He turned to his wife.
"Now whatever the animals are, we'll have them

killed."
He added quietly once the youngsters were out of hearing,

"Come, come.
The children aren't hurt and, after all, they haven't done

anything really terrible.
They've just found a new pet."
The Astronomer spoke with difficulty.
"Pardon me, ma'am, but can you

describe these animals?"
She shook her head.
She was quite beyond words.
"Can you just tell me if they--"



"I'm sorry," said the Industrialist, apologetically, "but I think I had

better take care of her.
Will you excuse me?"
"A moment.
Please.
One moment.
She said she had never seen such animals

before.
Surely it is not usual to find animals that are completely

unique on an estate such as this."
"I'm sorry.
Let's not discuss that now."
"Except that unique animals might have landed during the night."
The Industrialist stepped away from his wife.
"What are you implying?"
"I think we had better go to the barn, sir!"
The Industrialist stared a moment, turned and suddenly and quite

uncharacteristically began running.
The Astronomer followed and the

woman's wail rose unheeded behind them.
XI



The Industrialist stared, looked at the Astronomer, turned to stare

again.
"Those?"
"Those," said the Astronomer.
"I have no doubt we appear strange and

repulsive to them."
"What do they say?"
"Why, that they are uncomfortable and tired and even a little sick, but

that they are not seriously damaged, and that the youngsters treated

them well."
"Treated them well!
Scooping them up, keeping them in a cage, giving

them grass and raw meat to eat?
Tell me how to speak to them."
"It may take a little time.
Think _at_ them.
Try to listen.
It will come

to you, but perhaps not right away."
The Industrialist tried.
He grimaced with the effort of it, thinking

over and over again, "The youngsters were ignorant of your identity."
And the thought was suddenly in his mind: "We were quite aware of it and

because we knew they meant well by us according to their own view of the

matter, we did not attempt to attack them."
"Attack them?"
thought the Industrialist, and said it aloud in his

concentration.
"Why, yes," came the answering thought.
"We are armed."
One of the revolting little creatures in the cage lifted a metal object

and there was a sudden hole in the top of the cage and another in the

roof of the barn, each hole rimmed with charred wood.
"We hope," the creatures thought, "it will not be too difficult to make

repairs."
The Industrialist found it impossible to organize himself to the point

of directed thought.
He turned to the Astronomer.
"And with that weapon

in their possession they let themselves be handled and caged?
I don't

understand it."
But the calm thought came, "We would not harm the young of an

intelligent species."
XII



It was twilight.
The Industrialist had entirely missed the evening meal

and remained unaware of the fact.
He said, "Do you really think the ship will fly?"
"If they say so," said the Astronomer, "I'm sure it will.
They'll be

back, I hope, before too long."
"And when they do," said the Industrialist, energetically, "I will keep

my part of the agreement.
What is more I will move sky and earth to have

the world accept them.
I was entirely wrong, Doctor.
Creatures that

would refuse to harm children, under such provocation as they received,

are admirable.
But you know--I almost hate to say this--"



"Say what?"
"The kids.
Yours and mine.
I'm almost proud of them.
Imagine seizing

these creatures, feeding them or trying to, and keeping them hidden.
The

amazing gall of it.
Red told me it was his idea to get a job in a circus

on the strength of them.
Imagine!"
The Astronomer said, "Youth!"
XIII



The Merchant said, "Will we be taking off soon?"
"Half an hour," said the Explorer.
It was going to be a lonely trip back.
All the remaining seventeen of

the crew were dead and their ashes were to be left on a strange planet.
Back they would go with a limping ship and the burden of the controls

entirely on himself.
The Merchant said, "It was a good business stroke, not harming the young

ones.
We will get very good terms; _very_ good terms."
The Explorer thought: Business!
The Merchant then said, "They've lined up to see us off.
All of them.
You don't think they're too close, do you?
It would be bad to burn any

of them with the rocket blast at this stage of the game."
"They're safe."
"Horrible-looking things, aren't they?"
"Pleasant enough, inside.
Their thoughts are perfectly friendly."
"You wouldn't believe it of them.
That immature one, the one that first

picked us up--"



"They call him Red," provided the Explorer.
"That's a queer name for a monster.
Makes me laugh.
He actually feels

_bad_ that we're leaving.
Only I can't make out exactly why.
The nearest

I can come to it is something about a lost opportunity with some

organization or other that I can't quite interpret."
"A circus," said the Explorer, briefly.
"What?
Why, the impertinent monstrosity."
"Why not?
What would you have done if you had found _him_ wandering on

_your_ native world; found him sleeping on a field on Earth, red

tentacles, six legs, pseudopods and all?"
XIV



Red watched the ship leave.
His red tentacles, which gave him his

nickname, quivered their regret at lost opportunity to the very last,

and the eyes at their tips filled with drifting yellowish crystals that

were the equivalent of Earthly tears.
Transcriber's Note:



    This etext was produced from _Space Science Fiction_ May 1952.
Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.

    copyright on this publication was renewed.
Minor spelling and

    typographical errors have been corrected without note.